CLIFFSCOMPLETE

Shakespeare’s

Julius Caesar
Edited by Sidney Lamb
Associate Professor of English
Sir George Williams University, Montreal

Complete Text

+

Commentary

+

Glossary

Commentary by Diana Sweeney

Best-Selling Books • Digital Downloads • e-Books • Answer Networks • e-Newsletters • Branded Web Sites • e-Learning
New York, NY • Cleveland, OH • Indianapolis, IN

CLIFFSCOMPLETE

Shakespeare’s

Julius Caesar

About the Author
Diana Sweeney has an M.A. from The Shakespeare Institute in Stratfordupon-Avon. She has both taught and directed Shakespeare for the past fifteen years at North Hollywood High School in Los Angeles, California.

Publisher’s Acknowledgments
Editorial
Project Editor: Elizabeth Netedu Kuball
Acquisitions Editor: Gregory W. Tubach
Editorial Director: Kristin A. Cocks
Special Help: Michelle Hacker
Production
Indexer: Rebecca R. Plunkett
Proofreader: Christine Pingleton
Hungry Minds Indianapolis Production Services

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar
Hungry Minds, Inc.
909 Third Avenue
New York, NY 10022
www.hungryminds.com (Hungry Minds Web site)
www.cliffsnotes.com (CliffsNotes Web site)

Note: If you purchased this book without a cover you
should be aware that this book is stolen property. It was
reported as "unsold and destroyed" to the publisher, and
neither the author nor the publisher has received any
payment for this "stripped book."

Copyright © 2000 Hungry Minds, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this book, including interior design, cover design, and icons, may be reproduced or transmitted in any form, by any means (electronic, photocopying, recording, or otherwise) without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Library of Congress Control No.: 00-101107
ISBN: 0-7645-8569-X
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3
1O/QS/RQ/QR/IN
Distributed in the United States by Hungry Minds, Inc.
Distributed by CDG Books Canada Inc. for Canada; by Transworld Publishers Limited in the United Kingdom; by IDG Norge Books for Norway; by IDG Sweden Books for Sweden; by IDG Books Australia Publishing
Corporation Pty. Ltd. for Australia and New Zealand; by TransQuest Publishers Pte Ltd. for Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, and Hong Kong; by Gotop
Information Inc. for Taiwan; by ICG Muse, Inc. for Japan; by Norma Comunicaciones S.A. for Columbia; by Intersoft for South Africa; by Eyrolles for France; by
International Thomson Publishing for Germany,
Austria and Switzerland; by Distribuidora Cuspide for Argentina; by LR International for Brazil; by Galileo Libros for Chile; by Ediciones ZETA S.C.R. Ltda. for
Peru; by WS Computer Publishing Corporation, Inc., for the Philippines; by Contemporanea de Ediciones for Venezuela; by Express Computer Distributors for
the Caribbean and West Indies; by Micronesia Media Distributor, Inc. for Micronesia; by Grupo Editorial Norma S.A. for Guatemala; by Chips Computadoras
S.A. de C.V. for Mexico; by Editorial Norma de Panama S.A. for Panama; by American Bookshops for Finland. Authorized Sales Agent: Anthony Rudkin Associates for the Middle East and North Africa.
For general information on Hungry Minds’ products and services please contact our Customer Care department; within the U.S. at 800-762-2974, outside the
U.S. at 317-572-3993 or fax 317-572-4002.
For sales inquiries and resellers information, including discounts, premium and bulk quantity sales and foreign language translations please contact our Customer
Care department at 800-434-3422, fax 317-572-4002 or write to Hungry Minds, Inc., Attn: Customer Care department, 10475 Crosspoint Boulevard, Indianapolis, IN 46256.
For information on licensing foreign or domestic rights, please contact our Sub-Rights Customer Care department at
212-884-5000.
For information on using Hungry Minds’ products and services in the classroom or for ordering examination copies, please contact our Educational Sales department at 800-434-2086 or fax 317-572-4005.
Please contact our Public Relations department at 212-884-5163 for press review copies or 212-884-5000 for author interviews and other publicity information or
fax 212-884-5400.
For authorization to photocopy items for corporate, personal, or educational use, please contact Copyright Clearance Center,
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, or fax 978-750-4470.
LIMIT OF LIABILITY/DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY: THE PUBLISHER AND AUTHOR HAVE USED THEIR BEST EFFORTS IN PREPARING
THIS BOOK. THE PUBLISHER AND AUTHOR MAKE NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE ACCURACY OR
COMPLETENESS OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK AND SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. THERE ARE NO WARRANTIES WHICH EXTEND BEYOND THE DESCRIPTIONS CONTAINED
IN THIS PARAGRAPH. NO WARRANTY MAY BE CREATED OR EXTENDED BY SALES REPRESENTATIVES OR WRITTEN SALES MATERIALS.
THE ACCURACY AND COMPLETENESS OF THE INFORMATION PROVIDED HEREIN AND THE OPINIONS STATED HEREIN ARE NOT
GUARANTEED OR WARRANTED TO PRODUCE ANY PARTICULAR RESULTS, AND THE ADVICE AND STRATEGIES CONTAINED HEREIN
MAY NOT BE SUITABLE FOR EVERY INDIVIDUAL. NEITHER THE PUBLISHER NOR AUTHOR SHALL BE LIABLE FOR ANY LOSS OF PROFIT
OR ANY OTHER COMMERCIAL DAMAGES, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, OR OTHER
DAMAGES. FULFILLMENT OF EACH COUPON OFFER IS THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE OFFEROR.
Trademarks: Cliffs, CliffsNotes, the CliffsNotes logo, CliffsAP, CliffsComplete, CliffsTestPrep, CliffsQuickReview, CliffsNote-a-Day and all related logos and
trade dress are registered trademarks or trademarks of Hungry Minds, Inc., in the United States and other countries. All other trademarks are property of their
respective owners. Hungry Minds, Inc., is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
is a trademark of Hungry Minds, Inc.

CLIFFSCOMPLETE
Shakespeare’s
Julius Caesar

CONTENTS AT A GLANCE
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Act I. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Act II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Act III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Act IV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
Act V . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
CliffsComplete Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
CliffsComplete Resource Center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
CliffsComplete Reading Group
Discussion Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179

CLIFFSCOMPLETE
Shakespeare’s
Julius Caesar

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction: Julius Caesar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Introduction to William Shakespeare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Introduction to Early Modern England . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Introduction to Julius Caesar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Character Map. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Act I

Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3

Rome, a street. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Rome, a public place. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Rome, a street. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46

Act II

Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3
Scene 4

Brutus’ orchard. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Caesar’s house. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
A street. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Before Brutus’ house. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82

Act III

Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3

Rome, before the Capitol. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
The Forum. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
Rome, a street. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115

Act IV

Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3

Rome, a room in Antony’s house. . . . . . . . . . . . 121
Before Brutus’ tent near Sardis. . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
Within Brutus’ tent. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127

Act V

Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3
Scene 4
Scene 5

The Plain of Philippi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
The battlefield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
The battlefield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
The battlefield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158
The battlefield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160

viii

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

CliffsComplete Review. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
CliffsComplete Resource Center. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
CliffsComplete Reading Group Discussion Guide . . . 176
Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179

Shakespeare’s

JULIUS CAESAR

INTRODUCTION TO WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE
William Shakespeare, or the “Bard” as people fondly
call him, permeates almost all aspects of our society.
He can be found in our classrooms, on our televisions,
in our theatres, and in our cinemas. Speaking to us
through his plays, Shakespeare comments on his life
and culture, as well as our own. Actors still regularly
perform his plays on the modern stage and screen. The
1990s, for example, saw the release of cinematic versions of Romeo and Juliet, Hamlet, Othello, A Midsummer Night’s Dream, and many more of his works.

Anti-Stratfordians — modern scholars who
question the authorship of Shakespeare’s plays —
have used this lack of information to argue that
William Shakespeare either never existed or, if he did
exist, did not write any of the plays we attribute to
him. They believe that another historical figure, such
as Francis Bacon or Queen Elizabeth I, used the
name as a cover. Whether a man named William
Shakespeare ever actually existed is ultimately secondary to the recognition that the group of plays
bound together by that name does exist and continues to educate, enlighten, and entertain us.

In addition to the popularity of Shakespeare’s
plays as he wrote them, other writers have modernized his works to attract new audiences. For example,
West Side Story places Romeo and Juliet in New York
City, and A Thousand Acres sets King Lear in Iowa
corn country. Beyond adaptations and productions,
his life and works have captured our cultural imagination. The twentieth century witnessed the production of a play about two minor characters from
Shakespeare’s Hamlet in Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
are Dead and a fictional movie about Shakespeare’s
early life and poetic inspiration in Shakespeare in Love.
Despite his monumental presence in our culture,
Shakespeare remains enigmatic. He does not tell us
which plays he wrote alone, on which plays he collaborated with other playwrights, or which versions
of his plays to read and perform. Furthermore, with
only a handful of documents available about his life,
he does not tell us much about Shakespeare the person, forcing critics and scholars to look to historical
references to uncover the true-life great dramatist.

An engraved portrait of Shakespeare by an unknown artist, ca. 1607.
Culver Pictures, Inc./SuperStock

2

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Family life
Though scholars are unsure of the exact date
of Shakespeare’s birth, records indicate that his
parents — Mary and John Shakespeare — baptized
him on April 26, 1564, in the small provincial town
of Stratford-upon-Avon — so named because it sat
on the banks of the Avon river. Because common
practice was to baptize infants a few days after they
were born, scholars generally recognize April 23,
1564, as Shakespeare’s birthday. Coincidentally, April
23 is the day of St. George, the patron saint of England, as well as the day upon which Shakespeare
would die 52 years later. William was the third of
Mary and John’s eight children and the first of four
sons. The house in which scholars believe Shakespeare to have been born stands on Henley Street
and, despite many modifications over the years, you
can still visit it today.
Shakespeare’s father
Prior to Shakespeare’s birth, John Shakespeare lived
in Snitterfield, where he married Mary Arden, the
daughter of his landlord. After moving to Stratford
in 1552, he worked as a glover, a moneylender, and
a dealer in agricultural products such as wool and
grain. He also pursued public office and achieved a
variety of posts including bailiff, Stratford’s highest
elected position — equivalent to a small town’s
mayor. At the height of his career, sometime near
1576, he petitioned the Herald’s Office for a coat of
arms and thus the right to be a gentleman. But the
rise from the middle class to the gentry did not come
right away, and the costly petition expired without
being granted.
About this time, John Shakespeare mysteriously
fell into financial difficulty. He became involved in
serious litigation, was assessed heavy fines, and even
lost his seat on the town council. Some scholars
suggest that this decline could have resulted from
religious discrimination because the Shakespeare
family may have supported Catholicism, the practice of which was illegal in England. However, other

Shakespeare’s birthplace.
SuperStock

scholars point out that not all religious dissenters
(both Catholics and radical Puritans) lost their
posts due to their religion. Whatever the cause of
his decline, John did regain some prosperity toward
the end of his life. In 1596, the Herald’s Office
granted the Shakespeare family a coat of arms at the
petition of William, by now a successful playwright
in London. And John, prior to his death in 1601,
regained his seat on Stratford’s town council.
Childhood and education
Our understanding of William Shakespeare’s childhood in Stratford is primarily speculative because
children do not often appear in the legal records
from which many scholars attempt to reconstruct
Shakespeare’s life. Based on his father’s local prominence, scholars speculate that Shakespeare most
likely attended King’s New School, a school that usually employed Oxford graduates and was generally
well respected. Shakespeare would have started petty
school — the rough equivalent to modern preschool — at the age of four or five. He would have
learned to read on a hornbook, which was a sheet of
parchment or paper on which the alphabet and the
Lord’s Prayer were written. This sheet was framed in
wood and covered with a transparent piece of horn
for durability. After two years in petty school,
he would have transferred to grammar school,
where his school day would have probably lasted

Introduction to William Shakespeare

3

from 6 or 7 o’clock in the morning (depending on
the time of year) until 5 o’clock in the evening, with
only a handful of holidays.

Judith. Hamnet died at the age of 11 when Shakespeare was primarily living away from his family in
London.

While in grammar school, Shakespeare would
primarily have studied Latin, reciting and reading
the works of classical Roman authors such as Plautus, Ovid, Seneca, and Horace. Traces of these
authors’ works can be seen in his dramatic texts.
Toward his last years in grammar school, Shakespeare
would have acquired some basic skills in Greek as
well. Thus the remark made by Ben Jonson, Shakespeare’s well-educated friend and contemporary playwright, that Shakespeare knew “small Latin and less
Greek” is accurate. Jonson is not saying that when
Shakespeare left grammar school he was only semiliterate; he merely indicates that Shakespeare did not
attend University, where he would have gained more
Latin and Greek instruction.

For seven years after the twins’ baptism, the
records remain silent on Shakespeare. At some point,
he traveled to London and became involved with the
theatre, but he could have been anywhere between
21 and 28 years old when he did. Though some have
suggested that he may have served as an assistant to
a schoolmaster at a provincial school, it seems likely
that he went to London to become an actor, gradually becoming a playwright and gaining attention.

Wife and children
When Shakespeare became an adult, the historical
records documenting his existence began to increase.
In November 1582, at the age of 18, he married 26year-old Anne Hathaway from the nearby village of
Shottery. The disparity in their ages, coupled with
the fact that they baptized their first daughter,
Susanna, only six months later in May 1583, has
caused a great deal of modern speculation about the
nature of their relationship. However, sixteenth-century conceptions of marriage differed slightly from
our modern notions. Though all marriages needed
to be performed before a member of the clergy, many
of Shakespeare’s contemporaries believed that a couple could establish a relationship through a premarital contract by exchanging vows in front of
witnesses. This contract removed the social stigma
of pregnancy before marriage. (Shakespeare’s plays
contain instances of marriage prompted by pregnancy, and Measure for Measure includes this kind of
premarital contract.) Two years later, in February
1585, Shakespeare baptized his twins Hamnet and

The plays: On stage and in print
The next mention of Shakespeare comes in 1592 by
a University wit named Robert Greene when Shakespeare apparently was already a rising actor and
playwright for the London stage. Greene, no longer
a successful playwright, tried to warn other University wits about Shakespeare. He wrote:
For there is an upstart crow, beautified with our feathers,
that with his “Tiger’s heart wrapped in a player’s
hide” supposes he is as well able to bombast out a
blank verse as the best of you, and, being an absolute
Johannes Factotum, is in his own conceit the only
Shake-scene in a country.

This statement comes at a point in time when
men without a university education, like Shakespeare, were starting to compete as dramatists with
the University wits. As many critics have pointed out,
Greene’s statement recalls a line from 3 Henry VI,
which reads, “O tiger’s heart wrapped in a woman’s
hide!” (I.4.137). Greene’s remark does not indicate
that Shakespeare was generally disliked. On the contrary, another University wit, Thomas Nashe, wrote
of the great theatrical success of Henry VI, and Henry
Chettle, Greene’s publisher, later printed a flattering
apology to Shakespeare. What Greene’s statement

4

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

does show us is that Shakespeare’s reputation for poetry
had reached enough of a
prominence to provoke the
envy of a failing competitor.
In the following year,
1593, the government
closed London’s theatres due
to an outbreak of the
bubonic plague. Publication
history suggests that during
this closure, Shakespeare
may have written his two
narrative poems, Venus and
Adonis, published in 1593,
and The Rape of Lucrece,
published in 1594. These
are the only two works that A ground plan of London after the fire of 1666, drawn by Marcus Willemsz Doornik.
Shakespeare seems to have Guildhall Library, London/AKG, Berlin/SuperStock
playhouses until the 1599 opening of the now
helped into print; each carries a dedication by Shakefamous Globe Theatre, which was literally built with
speare to Henry Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton.
lumber from The Theatre. (The Globe, later
destroyed by fire, has recently been reconstructed in
Stage success
London and can be visited today.)
When the theatres reopened in 1594, Shakespeare
Recent scholars suggest that Shakespeare’s great
joined the Lord Chamberlain’s Men, an acting comtragedy, Julius Caesar, may have been the first of
pany. Though uncertain about the history of his early
Shakespeare’s plays performed in the original playdramatic works, scholars believe that by this point
house. When this open-air theatre on the Thames
he had written The Two Gentlemen of Verona, The
River opened, financial papers list Shakespeare’s
Taming of the Shrew, the Henry VI trilogy, and Titus
name as one of the principal investors. Already an
Andronicus. During his early years in the theatre, he
actor and a playwright, Shakespeare was now becomprimarily wrote history plays, with his romantic
ing a “Company Man.” This new status allowed him
comedies emerging in the 1590s. Even at this early
to share in the profits of the theatre rather than
stage in his career, Shakespeare was a success. In
merely getting paid for his plays, some of which pub1597, he was able to purchase New Place, one of the
lishers were beginning to release in quarto format.
two largest houses in Stratford, and secure a coat of
arms for his family.
Publications
In 1597, the lease expired on the Lord ChamA quarto was a small, inexpensive book typically used
berlain’s playhouse, called The Theatre. Because the
for leisure books such as plays; the term itself indiowner of The Theatre refused to renew the lease, the
cates that the printer folded the paper four times.
acting company was forced to perform at various

Introduction to William Shakespeare

The modern day equivalent of a quarto would be a
paperback. In contrast, the first collected works of
Shakespeare were in folio format, which means that
the printer folded each sheet only once. Scholars call
the collected edition of Shakespeare’s works the First
Folio. A folio was a larger and more prestigious book
than a quarto, and printers generally reserved the format for works such as the Bible.
No evidence exists that Shakespeare participated
in the publication of any of his plays. Members of
Shakespeare’s acting company printed the First Folio
seven years after Shakespeare’s death. Generally, playwrights wrote their works to be performed on stage,
and publishing them was a novel innovation at the
time. Shakespeare probably would not have thought
of them as books in the way we do. In fact, as a principal investor in the acting company (which purchased the play as well as the exclusive right to
perform it), he may not have even thought of them
as his own. He would probably have thought of his
plays as belonging to the company.
For this reason, scholars have generally characterized most quartos printed before the Folio as
“bad” by arguing that printers pirated the plays and
published them illegally. How would a printer have
received a pirated copy of a play? The theories range
from someone stealing a copy to an actor (or actors)
selling the play by relating it from memory to a
printer. Many times, major differences exist between
a quarto version of the play and a folio version, causing uncertainty about which is Shakespeare’s true creation. Hamlet, for example, is almost twice as long
in the Folio as in quarto versions. Recently, scholars
have come to realize the value of the different versions. The Norton Shakespeare, for example, includes
all three versions of King Lear — the quarto, the
folio, and the conflated version (the combination of
the quarto and folio).

5

Prolific productions
The first decade of the 1600s witnessed the publication of additional quartos as well as the production
of most of Shakespeare’s great tragedies, with Julius
Caesar appearing in 1599 and Hamlet in 1600–1601.
After the death of Queen Elizabeth in 1603, the
Lord Chamberlain’s Men became the King’s Men
under James I, Elizabeth’s successor. Around the time
of this transition in the English monarchy, the
famous tragedy Othello (1603–1604) was most likely
written and performed, followed closely by King Lear
(1605–1606), Antony and Cleopatra (1606), and
Macbeth (1606) in the next two years.
Shakespeare’s name also appears as a major
investor in the 1609 acquisition of an indoor theatre
known as the Blackfriars. This last period of Shakespeare’s career, which includes plays that considered
the acting conditions both at the Blackfriars and the
open-air Globe theatre, consists primarily of
romances or tragicomedies such as The Winter’s Tale
and The Tempest. On June 29, 1613, during a performance of All is True, or Henry VIII, the thatching
on top of The Globe caught fire and the playhouse
burned to the ground. After this incident, the King’s
Men moved solely into the indoor Blackfriars
Theatre.
Final days
During the last years of his career, Shakespeare collaborated on a couple of plays with contemporary
dramatist John Fletcher, even possibly coming out
of retirement — which scholars believe began sometime in 1613 — to work on The Two Noble Kinsmen
(1613–1614). Three years later, Shakespeare died on
April 23, 1616. Though the exact cause of death
remains unknown, a vicar from Stratford in the midseventeenth-century wrote in his diary that Shakespeare, perhaps celebrating the marriage of his
daughter, Judith, contracted a fever during a night

6

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

of revelry with fellow literary figures Ben Jonson and
Michael Drayton. Regardless, Shakespeare may have
felt his death was imminent in March of that year
because he altered his will. Interestingly, his will mentions no book or theatrical manuscripts, perhaps
indicating the lack of value that he put on printed
versions of his dramatic works and their status as
company property.
Seven years after Shakespeare’s death, John
Heminge and Henry Condell, fellow members of the
King’s Men, published his collected works. In their
preface, they claim that they are publishing the true
versions of Shakespeare’s plays partially as a response
to the previous quarto printings of 18 of his plays,
most of these with multiple printings. This Folio
contains 36 plays to which scholars generally add
Pericles and The Two Noble Kinsmen. This volume of
Shakespeare’s plays began the process of constructing Shakespeare not only as England’s national poet
but also as a monumental figure whose plays would
continue to captivate imaginations at the end of the
millennium with no signs of stopping. Ben Jonson’s
prophetic line about Shakespeare in the First
Folio — “He was not of an age, but for all time!” —
certainly holds true.

Chronology of Shakespeare’s plays
1590–1591
1591
1592
1592–1593
1593–1594
1594
1594–1595
1595

The Two Gentlemen of Verona
The Taming of the Shrew
2 Henry VI
3 Henry VI
1 Henry VI
Titus Andronicus
Richard III
Venus and Adonis
The Rape of Lucrece
The Comedy of Errors
Love’s Labour’s Lost
Richard II

1595–1596
1596
1596–1597
1597–1598
1598
1598–1599
1599
1599–1600
1600–1601
1601
1602
1593–1603
1603
1603–1604
1604–1605
1605
1605–1606
1606
1607
1608
1609
1610
1611
1612–1613
1613
1613–1614

Romeo and Juliet
A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Love’s Labour’s Won
(This manuscript was lost.)
King John
The Merchant of Venice
1 Henry IV
The Merry Wives of Windsor
2 Henry IV
Much Ado About Nothing
Henry V
Julius Caesar
As You Like It
Hamlet
Twelfth Night, or What You Will
Troilus and Cressida
Sonnets
Measure for Measure
A Lover’s Complaint
Othello
All’s Well That Ends Well
Timon of Athens
King Lear
Macbeth
Antony and Cleopatra
Pericles
Coriolanus
The Winter’s Tale
Cymbeline
The Tempest
Cardenio (with John Fletcher;
this manuscript was lost.)
All is True, or Henry VIII
The Two Noble Kinsmen
(with John Fletcher)

This chronology is derived from Stanley Wells’
and Gary Taylor’s William Shakespeare: A Textual
Companion, which is listed in the “Works consulted”
section below.

Introduction to William Shakespeare

A note on Shakespeare’s language

7

Readers encountering Shakespeare for the first time
usually find Early Modern English difficult to understand. Yet, rather than serving as a barrier to Shakespeare, the richness of this language should form part
of our appreciation of the Bard.

Shakespeare often employs these puns as a way of
illustrating the distance between what is on the surface — apparent meanings — and what meanings lie
underneath. Though recognizing these puns may be
difficult at first, the notes in the far right column
point many of them out to you.

One of the first things readers usually notice
about the language is the use of pronouns. Like the
King James Version of the Bible, Shakespeare’s pronouns are slightly different from our own and can
cause confusion. Words like “thou” (you), “thee” and
“ye” (objective cases of you), and “thy” and “thine”
(your/yours) appear throughout Shakespeare’s plays.
You may need a little time to get used to these
changes. You can find the definitions for other words
that commonly cause confusion in the glossary column on the right side of each page in this edition.

If you are encountering Shakespeare’s plays for
the first time, the following reading tips may help
ease you into the plays. Shakespeare’s lines were
meant to be spoken; therefore, reading them aloud
or speaking them should help with comprehension.
Also, though most of the lines are poetic, do not forget to read complete sentences — move from period
to period as well as from line to line. Although
Shakespeare’s language can be difficult at first, the
rewards of immersing yourself in the richness and
fluidity of the lines are immeasurable.

Iambic pentameter
Though Shakespeare sometimes wrote in prose, he
wrote most of his plays in poetry, specifically blank
verse. Blank verse consists of lines in unrhymed
iambic pentameter. Iambic refers to the stress patterns
of the line. An iamb is an element of sound that consists of two beats — the first unstressed (da) and the
second stressed (DA). A good example of an iambic
line is Hamlet’s famous line “To be or not to be,” in
which you do not stress “To,” “or,” and “to,” but you
do stress “be,” “not,” and “be.” Pentameter refers to
the meter or number of stressed syllables in a line.
Pentameter has five stressed syllables. Thus, Romeo’s
line “But soft, what light through yonder window
breaks?” (II.2.2) is a good example of an iambic pentameter line.
Wordplay
Shakespeare’s language is also verbally rich as he,
along with many dramatists of his period, had a
fondness for wordplay. This wordplay often takes the
forms of double meanings, called puns, where a word
can mean more than one thing in a given context.

Works consulted
For more information on Shakespeare’s life and
works, see the following:
Bevington, David, ed. The Complete Works of Shakespeare. New York: Longman, 1997.
Evans, G. Blakemore, ed. The Riverside Shakespeare.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1997.
Greenblatt, Stephen, ed. The Norton Shakespeare.
New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 1997.
Kastan, David Scott, ed. A Companion to Shakespeare. Oxford: Blackwell, 1999.
McDonald, Russ. The Bedford Companion to Shakespeare: An Introduction with Documents. Boston:
Bedford-St. Martin’s Press, 1996.
Wells, Stanley and Gary Taylor. William Shakespeare:
A Textual Companion. New York: W. W. Norton
and Co., 1997.

8

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

INTRODUCTION TO EARLY
MODERN ENGLAND
William Shakespeare (1564–1616) lived during a
period in England’s history that people have generally referred to as the English Renaissance. The term
renaissance, meaning rebirth, was applied to this
period of English history as a way of celebrating what
was perceived as the rapid development of art, literature, science, and politics: in many ways, the rebirth
of classical Rome.
Recently, scholars have challenged the name
“English Renaissance” on two grounds. First, some
scholars argue that the term should not be used
because women did not share in the advancements
of English culture during this time period; their legal
status was still below that of men. Second, other
scholars have challenged the basic notion that this
period saw a sudden explosion of culture. A rebirth
of civilization suggests that the previous period of
time was not civilized. This second group of scholars sees a much more gradual transition between the
Middle Ages and Shakespeare’s time.
Some people use the terms Elizabethan and
Jacobean when referring to periods of the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries. These terms correspond
to the reigns of Elizabeth I (1558–1603) and James
I (1603–1625). The problem with these terms is that
they do not cover large spans of time; for example,
Shakespeare’s life and career spans both monarchies.
Scholars are now beginning to replace Renaissance with the term Early Modern when referring to
this time period, but people still use both terms
interchangeably. The term Early Modern recognizes
that this period established many of the foundations
of our modern culture. Though critics still disagree
about the exact dates of the period, in general, the
dates range from 1450 to 1750. Thus, Shakespeare’s
life clearly falls within the Early Modern period.
Shakespeare’s plays live on in our culture, but we
must remember that Shakespeare’s culture differed

greatly from our own. Though his understanding of
human nature and relationships seems to apply to
our modern lives, we must try to understand the
world he lived in so we can better understand his
plays. This introduction helps you do just that. It
examines the intellectual, religious, political, and
social contexts of Shakespeare’s work before turning
to the importance of the theatre and the printing
press.

Intellectual context
In general, people in Early Modern England looked
at the universe, the human body, and science very
differently from the way we do. But while we do not
share their same beliefs, we must not think of people during Shakespeare’s time as lacking in intelligence or education. Discoveries made during the
Early Modern period concerning the universe and
the human body provide the basis of modern science.
Cosmology
One subject we view very differently than Early
Modern thinkers is cosmology. Shakespeare’s contemporaries believed in the astronomy of Ptolemy,
an intellectual from Alexandria in the second century A.D. Ptolemy thought that the earth stood at
the center of the universe, surrounded by nine concentric rings. The celestial bodies circled the earth in
the following order: the moon, Mercury, Venus, the
sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and the stars. The entire
system was controlled by the primum mobile, or
Prime Mover, which initiated and maintained the
movement of the celestial bodies. No one had yet
discovered the last three planets in our solar system,
Uranus, Neptune and Pluto.
In 1543, Nicolaus Copernicus published his theory of a sun-based solar system, in which the sun
stood at the center and the planets revolved around
it. Though this theory appeared prior to

Introduction to Early Modern England

Shakespeare’s birth, people didn’t really start to
change their minds until 1610, when Galileo used
his telescope to confirm Copernicus’ theory. David
Bevington asserts in the general introduction to his
edition of Shakespeare’s works that during most of
Shakespeare’s writing career, the cosmology of the
universe was in question, and this sense of uncertainty influences some of his plays.
Universal hierarchy
Closely related to Ptolemy’s hierarchical view of the
universe is a hierarchical conception of the Earth
(sometimes referred to as the Chain of Being). During the Early Modern period, many people believed
that all of creation was organized hierarchically. God
existed at the top, followed by the angels, men,
women, animals, plants, and rocks. (Because all
women were thought to exist below all men on the
chain, we can easily imagine the confusion that Elizabeth I caused when she became queen of England.
She was literally “out of order,” an expression that still
exists in our society.) Though the concept of this hierarchy is a useful one when beginning to study Shakespeare, keep in mind that distinctions in this
hierarchical view were not always clear and that we
should not reduce all Early Modern thinking to a
simple chain.
Elements and humors
The belief in a hierarchical scheme of existence created a comforting sense of order and balance that
carried over into science as well. Shakespeare’s contemporaries generally accepted that four different
elements composed everything in the universe:
earth, air, water, and fire. People associated these
four elements with four qualities of being. These
qualities — hot, cold, moist, and dry — appeared
in different combinations in the elements. For
example, air was hot and moist; water was cold and
moist; earth was cold and dry; and fire was hot
and dry.

9

In addition, people believed that the human
body contained all four elements in the form
of humors — blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black
bile — each of which corresponded to an element.
Blood corresponded to air (hot and moist), phlegm
to water (cold and moist), yellow bile to fire (hot and
dry), and black bile to earth (cold and dry). When
someone was sick, physicians generally believed that
the patient’s humors were not in the proper balance.
For example, if someone were diagnosed with an
abundance of blood, the physician would bleed the
patient (using leeches or cutting the skin) in order
to restore the balance.
Shakespeare’s contemporaries also believed that
the humors determined personality and temperament. If a person’s dominant humor was blood, he
was considered lighthearted. If dominated by yellow
bile (or choler), that person was irritable. The dominance of phlegm led a person to be dull and kind.
And if black bile prevailed, he was melancholy or sad.
Thus, people of Early Modern England often used
the humors to explain behavior and emotional outbursts. Throughout Shakespeare’s plays, he uses the
concept of the humors to define and explain various
characters. In the play Julius Caesar, the humors are
referred to on several occasions. For example, in Act
IV, Scene 3, the famous “quarrel scene,” Brutus
accuses a testy Cassius of having a “rash choler.”

Religious context
Shakespeare lived in an England full of religious
uncertainty and dispute. From the Protestant Reformation to the translation of the Bible into English,
the Early Modern era is punctuated with events that
have greatly influenced modern religious beliefs.
The Reformation
Until the Protestant Reformation, the only Christian church was the Catholic, or “universal,” church.

10

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Beginning in Europe in the early sixteenth century,
religious thinkers such as Martin Luther and John
Calvin, who claimed that the Roman Catholic
Church had become corrupt and was no longer following the word of God, began what has become
known as the Protestant Reformation. The Protestants (“protestors”) believed in salvation by faith
rather than works. They also believed in the primacy
of the Bible and advocated giving all people access
to reading the Bible.

Henry’s petitions for a divorce, forcing him to
divorce Catherine without the Church’s approval,
which he did in 1533.
The Act of Supremacy
The following year, the Pope excommunicated
Henry VIII while Parliament confirmed his divorce
and the legitimacy of his new marriage through the
Act of Succession. Later in 1534, Parliament passed
the Act of Supremacy, naming Henry the “Supreme
Head of the Church in England.” Henry continued
to persecute both radical Protestant reformers and
Catholics who remained loyal to Rome.
Henry VIII’s death in 1547 brought Edward VI,
his 10-year-old son by Jane Seymour (the king’s third
wife), to the throne. This succession gave Protestant
reformers the chance to solidify their break with the
Catholic Church. During Edward’s reign, Archbishop Thomas Cranmer established the foundation
for the Anglican Church through his 42 articles of
religion. He also wrote the first Book of Common
Prayer, adopted in 1549, which was the official text
for worship services in England.

A portrait of King Henry VIII, artist unknown, ca. 1542.
National Portrait Gallery, London/SuperStock

Many English people initially resisted Protestant
ideas. However, the Reformation in England began
in 1527 during the reign of Henry VIII, prior to
Shakespeare’s birth. In that year, Henry VIII decided
to divorce his wife, Catherine of Aragon, for her failure to produce a male heir. (Only one of their children, Mary, survived past infancy.) Rome denied

Bloody Mary
Catholics continued to be persecuted until 1553,
when the sickly Edward VI died and was succeeded
by Mary, his half-sister and the Catholic daughter of
Catherine of Aragon. The reign of Mary witnessed
the reversal of religion in England through the
restoration of Catholic authority and obedience to
Rome. Protestants were executed in large numbers,
which earned the monarch the nickname “Bloody
Mary.” Many Protestants fled to Europe to escape
persecution.
Elizabeth, the daughter of Henry VIII and Anne
Boleyn, outwardly complied with the mandated
Catholicism during her half-sister Mary’s reign, but
she restored Protestantism when she took the throne
in 1558 after Mary’s death. Thus, in the space of a

Introduction to Early Modern England

single decade, England’s throne passed from Protestant to Catholic to Protestant, with each change carrying serious and deadly consequences.
Though Elizabeth reigned in relative peace from
1558 until her death in 1603, religion was still a serious concern for her subjects. During Shakespeare’s
life, a great deal of religious dissent existed in England. Many Catholics, who remained loyal to Rome
and their church, were persecuted for their beliefs. At
the other end of the spectrum, the Puritans were persecuted for their belief that the Reformation was not
complete. (The English pejoratively applied the term
Puritan to religious groups that wanted to continue
purifying the English church by such measures as
removing the episcopacy, or the structure of bishops.)
The Great Bible
One thing agreed upon by both the Anglicans
and Puritans was the importance of a Bible written
in English. Translated by William Tyndale in 1525,
the first authorized Bible in English, published in
1539, was known as the Great Bible. This Bible was
later revised during Elizabeth’s reign into what was
known as the Bishop’s Bible. As Stephen Greenblatt
points out in his introduction to the Norton Shakespeare, Shakespeare would probably have been familiar with both the Bishop’s Bible, heard aloud in Mass,
and the Geneva Bible, which was written by English
exiles in Geneva. The last authorized Bible produced
during Shakespeare’s lifetime came within the last
decade of his life when James I’s commissioned edition, known as the King James Bible, appeared in
1611.

11

Elizabeth I
Despite being a Protestant, Elizabeth I tried to take
a middle road on the religious question. She allowed
Catholics to practice their religion in private as long
as they outwardly appeared Anglican and remained
loyal to the throne.
Elizabeth’s monarchy was one of absolute
supremacy. Believing in the divine right of kings, she
styled herself as being appointed by God to rule England. To oppose the Queen’s will was the equivalent
of opposing God’s will. Known as passive obedience,
this doctrine did not allow any opposition even to a
tyrannical monarch because God had appointed the
king or queen for reasons unknown to His subjects
on earth. However, as Bevington notes, Elizabeth’s
power was not as absolute as her rhetoric suggested.
Parliament, already well established in England,
reserved some power, such as the authority to levy
taxes, for itself.

Political context
Politics and religion were closely related in Shakespeare’s England. Both of the monarchs under whom
Shakespeare lived had to deal with religious and
political dissenters.
A portrait of Elizabeth I by George Gower, ca. 1588.
National Portrait Gallery, London/SuperStock

12

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Elizabeth I lived in a society that restricted
women from possessing any political or personal
autonomy and power. As queen, Elizabeth violated
and called into question many of the prejudices and
practices against women. In a way, her society forced
her to “overcome” her sex in order to rule effectively.
However, her position did nothing to increase the
status of women in England.
One of the rhetorical strategies that Elizabeth
adopted in order to rule effectively was to separate
her position as monarch of England from her natural body — to separate her body politic from her body
natural. In addition, throughout her reign, Elizabeth
brilliantly negotiated between domestic and foreign
factions — some of whom were anxious about a
female monarch and wanted her to marry — appeasing both sides without ever committing to one.
She remained unmarried throughout her 45-year
reign, partially by styling herself as the Virgin Queen
whose purity represented England herself. Her refusal
to marry and her habit of hinting and promising
marriage with suitors both foreign and domestic
helped Elizabeth maintain internal and external
peace. Not marrying allowed her to retain her independence, but it left the succession of the English
throne in question. In 1603, on her deathbed, she
named James VI, King of Scotland and son of her
cousin Mary, as her successor.
James I
When he assumed the English crown, James VI of
Scotland became James I of England. (Some historians refer to him as James VI and I.) Like Elizabeth,
James was a strong believer in the divine right of
kings and their absolute authority.
Upon his arrival in London to claim the English
throne, James made his plans to unite Scotland and
England clear. However, a long-standing history of
enmity existed between the two countries. Partially
as a result of this history and the influx of Scottish

courtiers into English society, anti-Scottish prejudice
abounded in England. When James asked Parliament
for the title of “King of Great Britain,” he was
denied.
As scholars such as Bevington have pointed out,
James was less successful than Elizabeth was in negotiating between the different religious and political
factions in England. Although he was a Protestant,
he began to have problems with the Puritan sect of
the House of Commons, which ultimately led to a
rift between the court (which also started to have
Catholic sympathies) and the Parliament. This rift
between the monarchy and Parliament eventually
escalated into the civil war that would erupt during
the reign of James’s son, Charles I.
In spite of its difficulties with Parliament, James’
court was a site of wealth, luxury, and extravagance.
James I commissioned elaborate feasts, masques, and
pageants, and in doing so he more than doubled the
royal debt. Stephen Greenblatt suggests that Shakespeare’s The Tempest may reflect this extravagance
through Prospero’s magnificent banquet and accompanying masque. Reigning from 1603 to 1625,
James I remained the King of England throughout
the last years of Shakespeare’s life.

Social context
Shakespeare’s England divided itself roughly into two
social classes: the aristocrats (or nobility) and everyone else. The primary distinctions between these two
classes were ancestry, wealth, and power. Simply put,
the aristocrats were the only ones who possessed all
three.
Aristocrats were born with their wealth, but the
growth of trade and the development of skilled professions began to provide wealth for those not born
with it. Although the notion of a middle class did
not begin to develop until after Shakespeare’s death,
the possibility of some social mobility did exist in

Introduction to Early Modern England

13

Early Modern England. Shakespeare himself used the
wealth gained from the theatre to move into the
lower ranks of the aristocracy by securing a coat of
arms for his family.

Furthermore, women did not generally receive
an education and could not enter certain professions,
including acting. Instead, society relegated women
to the domestic sphere of the home.

Shakespeare was not unique in this movement,
but not all people received the opportunity to
increase their social status. Members of the aristocracy feared this social movement and, as a result, promoted harsh laws of apprenticeship and fashion,
restricting certain styles of dress and material. These
laws dictated that only the aristocracy could wear certain articles of clothing, colors, and materials.
Though enforcement was a difficult task, the Early
Modern aristocracy considered dressing above one’s
station a moral and ethical violation.

Although there are only two women in Julius
Caesar, Brutus’ wife, Portia, gives the reader an interesting look at Roman women through Elizabethan
eyes. In Act II, Scene 1, Portia is concerned about
her husband’s recent erratic behavior. Instead of
remaining the silent, complacent wife, Portia confronts her husband, asking Brutus to treat her as a
respected equal by revealing his secrets to her. She
reminds him that she is an honorable and constant
woman, strong enough to bear anything her husband
may reveal to her. Brutus eventually tells Portia his
plans, but by Act II, Scene 4, under the burdens of
those secrets, Portia laments, “how weak a thing /
The heart of woman is.” Frantic that she will betray
her husband, Portia complains that she has “a man’s
mind, but a woman’s might. / How hard it is for
women to keep counsel.”

The status of women
The legal status of women did not allow them much
public or private autonomy. English society functioned on a system of patriarchy and hierarchy (see
“Universal hierarchy” earlier in this introduction),
which means that men controlled society beginning
with the individual family. In fact, the family
metaphorically corresponded to the state. For example, the husband was the king of his family. His
authority to control his family was absolute and
based on divine right, similar to that of the country’s
king. People also saw the family itself differently than
today, considering apprentices and servants part of
the whole family.
The practice of primogeniture — a system of
inheritance that passed all of a family’s wealth
through the first male child — accompanied this system of patriarchy. Thus women did not generally
inherit their family’s wealth and titles. In the absence
of a male heir, some women, such as Queen Elizabeth, did. But after women married, they lost almost
all of their already limited legal rights, such as the
right to inherit, to own property, and to sign contracts. In all likelihood, Elizabeth I would have lost
much of her power and authority if she married.

Daily life
Daily life in Early Modern England began before
sun-up — exactly how early depended on one’s station in life. A servant’s responsibilities usually
included preparing the house for the day. Families
usually possessed limited living space, and even
among wealthy families multiple family members
tended to share a small number of rooms, suggesting that privacy may not have been important or
practical.
Working through the morning, Elizabethans usually had lunch about noon. This midday meal was the
primary meal of the day, much like dinner is for modern families. The workday usually ended around sundown or 5:00 p.m., depending on the season. Before
an early bedtime, Elizabethans usually ate a light
repast and then settled in for a couple of hours of
reading (if the family members were literate and could
bear the high cost of books) or socializing.

14

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Mortality rates
Mortality rates in Early Modern England were high
compared to our standards, especially among infants.
Infection and disease ran rampant because physicians
did not realize the need for antiseptics and sterile
equipment. As a result, communicable diseases often
spread very rapidly in cities, particularly London.
In addition, the bubonic plague frequently ravaged England, with two major outbreaks — from
1592–1594 and in 1603 — occurring during Shakespeare’s lifetime. People did not understand the
plague and generally perceived it as God’s punishment. (We now know that the plague was spread by
fleas and could not be spread directly from human
to human.) Without a cure or an understanding of
what transmitted the disease, physicians could do
nothing to stop the thousands of deaths that resulted
from each outbreak. These outbreaks had a direct
effect on Shakespeare’s career, because the government often closed the theatres in an effort to impede
the spread of the disease.
London life
In the sixteenth century, London, though small compared to modern cities, was the largest city of
Europe, with a population of about 200,000 inhabitants in the city and surrounding suburbs. London
was a crowded city without a sewer system, which
facilitated epidemics such as the plague. In addition,
crime rates were high in the city due to inefficient
law enforcement and the lack of street lighting.
Despite these drawbacks, London was the cultural, political, and social heart of England. As the
home of the monarch and most of England’s trade,
London was a bustling metropolis. Not surprisingly,
a young Shakespeare moved to London to begin his
professional career.

The theatre
Most theatres were not actually located within the
city of London. Rather, theatre owners built them
on the South bank of the Thames River (in Southwark) across from the city in order to avoid the strict
regulations that applied within the city’s walls. These
restrictions stemmed from a mistrust of public performances as locations of plague and riotous behavior. Furthermore, because theatre performances took
place during the day, they took laborers away from
their jobs. Opposition to the theatres also came from
Puritans who believed that they fostered immorality.
Therefore, theatres moved out of the city, to areas
near other sites of restricted activities, such as dog
fighting, bear- and bull-baiting, and prostitution.
Despite the move, the theatre was not free from
censorship or regulation. In fact, a branch of the government known as the Office of the Revels
attempted to ensure that plays did not present politically or socially sensitive material. Prior to each performance, the Master of the Revels would read a
complete text of each play, cutting out offending sections or, in some cases, not approving the play for
public performance.

The recently reconstructed Globe Theatre.
Chris Parker/PAL

Introduction to Early Modern England

15

Performance spaces
Theatres in Early Modern
England were quite different
from our modern facilities.
They were usually open-air,
relying heavily on natural
light and good weather. The
rectangular stage extended
out into an area that people
called the pit — a circular,
uncovered area about 70 feet
in diameter. Audience members had two choices when
purchasing admission to a
theatre. Admission to the
pit, where the lower classes
(or groundlings) stood for the
Shakespeare in Love shows how the interior of the Globe would have appeared.
performances, was the Everett
Collection
cheaper option. People of
Globe Theatre in London in which Shakespeare’s
wealth could purchase a seat in one of the three covcompany, The Lord Chamberlain’s Men (later the
ered tiers of seats that ringed the pit. At full capacKing’s Men), staged its plays. However, indoor theity, a public theatre in Early Modern England could
atres, such as the Blackfriars, differed slightly because
hold between 2,000 and 3,000 people.
the pit was filled with chairs that faced a rectangular
The stage, which projected into the pit and was
stage. Because only the wealthy could afford the cost
raised about five feet above it, had a covered portion
of admission, the public generally considered these
called the heavens. The heavens enclosed theatrical
theatres private.
equipment for lowering and raising actors to and
The Globe Theatre was partially owned by
from the stage. A trapdoor in the middle of the stage
William
Shakespeare and was an example of the type
provided theatrical graves for characters such as
of outdoor theatre described above. When Cuthbert
Ophelia and also allowed ghosts, such as Banquo in
Burbage, another partner in Shakespeare’s acting
Macbeth, to rise from the earth. A wall separated the
company, The Chamberlain’s Men, was unable to
back of the stage from the actors’ dressing room,
renew the ground lease for the theatre they used
known as the tiring house. At each end of the wall
before 1599, he had the old theatre dismantled and
stood a door for major entrances and exits. Above
rebuilt in Southwark, just outside London. The
the wall and doors stood a gallery directly above the
newly rebuilt Globe opened to audiences in the midstage, reserved for the wealthiest spectators. Actors
dle of 1599 and some scholars believe that Julius
occasionally used this area when a performance called
Caesar was the first play to be performed in the new
for a difference in height — for example, to repretheatre.
sent Juliet’s balcony or the walls of a besieged city. A
good example of this type of theatre was the original

16

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Actors and staging
Performances in Shakespeare’s England do not
appear to have employed scenery. However, theatre
companies developed their costumes with great care
and expense. In fact, a playing company’s costumes
were its most valuable items. These extravagant costumes were the object of much controversy because
some aristocrats feared that the actors could use them
to disguise their social status on the streets of London.
Costumes also disguised a player’s gender. All
actors on the stage during Shakespeare’s lifetime were
men. Young boys whose voices had not reached
maturity played female parts. This practice no doubt
influenced Shakespeare’s and his contemporary playwrights’ thematic explorations of cross-dressing.
Though historians have managed to reconstruct
the appearance of the early modern theatre, such as
the recent construction of the Globe in London,
much of the information regarding how plays were
performed during this era has been lost. Scholars of
Early Modern theatre have turned to the scant external and internal stage directions in manuscripts in
an effort to find these answers. Although a hindrance
for modern critics and scholars, the lack of detail
about Early Modern performances has allowed modern directors and actors a great deal of flexibility and
room to be creative.

The printing press
If not for the printing press, many Early Modern
plays may not have survived until today. In Shakespeare’s time, printers produced all books by sheet —
a single large piece of paper that the printer would
fold in order to produce the desired book size. For
example, a folio required folding the sheet once, a
quarto four times, an octavo eight, and so on. Sheets
would be printed one side at a time; thus, printers
had to simultaneously print multiple nonconsecutive pages.

In order to estimate what section of the text
would be on each page, the printer would cast off
copy. After the printer made these estimates, compositors would set the type upside down, letter by letter. This process of setting type produced textual
errors, some of which a proofreader would catch.
When a proofreader found an error, the compositors
would fix the piece or pieces of type. Printers called
corrections made after printing began stop-press corrections because they literally had to stop the press
to fix the error. Because of the high cost of paper,
printers would still sell the sheets printed before they
made the correction.
Printers placed frames of text in the bed of the
printing press and used them to imprint the paper.
They then folded and grouped the sheets of paper
into gatherings, after which the pages were ready for
sale. The buyer had the option of getting the new
play bound.
The printing process was crucial to the preservation of Shakespeare’s works, but the printing of
drama in Early Modern England was not a standardized practice. Many of the first editions of
Shakespeare’s plays appear in quarto format and,
until recently, scholars regarded them as “corrupt.”
In fact, scholars still debate how close a relationship
exists between what appeared on the stage in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and what appears
on the printed page. The inconsistent and scant
appearance of stage directions, for example, makes it
difficult to determine how close this relationship was.
We know that the practice of the theatre allowed
the alteration of plays by a variety of hands other
than the author’s, further complicating any efforts to
extract what a playwright wrote and what was
changed by either the players, the printers, or the
government censors. Theatre was a collaborative
environment. Rather than lament our inability to
determine authorship and what exactly Shakespeare
wrote, we should work to understand this collaborative nature and learn from it.

Introduction to Julius Caesar

The text of Julius Caesar exists in only one form
as it was printed in the 1623 Folio collection of the
plays. Based on the number of stage directions
included in the script, the compositors were most
likely working from a theatrical prompt book or a
copy of that document.
Shakespeare wrote his plays for the stage, and
the existing published texts reflect the collaborative
nature of the theatre as well as the unavoidable
changes made during the printing process. A play’s
first written version would have been the author’s
foul papers, which invariably consisted of blotted lines
and revised text. From there, a scribe would recopy
the play and produce a fair copy. The theatre manager would then copy out and annotate this copy
into a playbook (what people today call a promptbook).
At this point, scrolls of individual parts were
copied out for actors to memorize. (Due to the high
cost of paper, theatre companies could not afford to
provide their actors with a complete copy of the
play.) The government required the company to send
the playbook to the Master of the Revels, the government official who would make any necessary
changes or mark any passages considered unacceptable for performance.
Printers could have used any one of these copies
to print a play. We cannot determine whether a
printer used the author’s version, the modified theatrical version, the censored version, or a combination when printing a given play. Refer back to the
“Publications” section of the “Introduction to
William Shakespeare” for further discussion of the
impact printing practices has on our understanding
of Shakespeare’s works.

Works cited
For more information regarding Early Modern England, consult the following works:

17

Bevington, David. “General Introduction.” The
Complete Works of William Shakespeare. Updated
Fourth edition. New York: Longman, 1997.
Greenblatt, Stephen. “Shakespeare’s World.” Norton
Shakespeare. New York: W. W. Norton and Co.,
1997.
Kastan, David Scott, ed. A Companion to Shakespeare. Oxford: Blackwell, 1999.
McDonald, Russ. The Bedford Companion to Shakespeare: An Introduction with Documents. Boston:
Bedford-St. Martin’s Press, 1996.

INTRODUCTION TO
JULIUS CAESAR
The seemingly straightforward simplicity of Julius
Caesar has made it a perennial favorite for almost
400 years. Despite its simplicity, almost Roman in
nature, the play is rich both dramatically and thematically, and every generation since Shakespeare’s
time has been able to identify with some political
aspect of the play. The Victorians found a stoic, sympathetic character in Brutus and found Caesar unforgivably weak and tyrannical. As we move into the
twenty-first century, audiences and readers, familiar
with leaders having public imperfections, are more
forgiving of Caesar and are often suspicious of Brutus’ moralistic posturing. The play has also formed
most modern readers’ opinions and views of ancient
Rome and Romans. In the article, “Shakespeare and
the Elizabethan Romans,” published in Shakespeare
Survey #10 in 1957, critic T.J.B. Spencer wrote, “The
part played by Shakespeare himself in creating our
notions of the ancient Romans should not be forgotten . . . we are all in the power of Shakespeare’s
imagination, a power which has been exercised for
several generations and from which it is scarcely possible to extricate ourselves.”
The structure of the play follows closely the pattern of the typical Elizabethan revenge play but varies
in form from Shakespeare’s other history plays.

18

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Revenge plays, extremely popular in the theatre of
Shakespeare’s day, dealt with the retribution of an
evil act. For example, a murder was always punished
by another murder and often under the auspices of
the original victim’s ghost. The person who committed the first murder, regardless of personal honor
or motives, was doomed from the beginning. Julius
Caesar, a play that deals with actual historical events,
differs somewhat from the plays that Shakespeare
wrote about English history. As Judah Stampfer
points out in The Tragic Engagement: A Study of
Shakespeare’s Classical Tragedies, Shakespeare’s English history plays sought to establish some sort of
legitimacy by the end of the play. But Julius Caesar
consists of one illegitimate act after another. Caesar
overthrows Pompey and damages the republic. Brutus and the other conspirators plot to assassinate Caesar, mob rule is tolerated, Antony instructs Octavius
in Machiavellian ethics and the play ends with
Octavius positioning for authority, with civil war
imminent.
The majority of Shakespeare’s plays are written
in blank verse and Julius Caesar is no exception.
Blank verse is a form of poetry in iambic pentameter. Each line has ten syllables — five unstressed syllables alternating with five stressed syllables.
Occasionally, a word that is usually pronounced as
one syllable is accompanied by a grave accent. The
accent is an indication that the word should be spoken with two syllables. For example, the word
“moved,” usually one syllable, with a grave accent
would be pronounced as “move-ed.” This allows the
line to fall correctly into the rhythm of the iambic
pentameter.
During the Renaissance, there was a rekindling
of interest in ancient Roman literature and art. Thus,
the subject matter was of great interest to Elizabethan
audiences. Shakespeare wrote a total of four plays set
in ancient Rome. In addition to Julius Caesar, Shakespeare’s Roman plays include Titus Andronicus,
Antony and Cleopatra, and Coriolanus. Shakespeare
was especially interested in the character of Julius

Caesar and mentions him consistently in his other
plays, including Hamlet, Richard III, As You Like It,
Henry IV, Parts 1 and 2, and Henry VI, Parts 2 and 3.

Date and text
Julius Caesar is speculated to be Shakespeare’s
twenty-first play, written at the end of the cycle of
history plays and just before Hamlet. The play was
first performed, and thus, thought to have been written, in 1599 and may have been the premier show
of the newly rebuilt Globe Theatre. This date is
based on the journal of a Swiss traveler, Thomas Platter, who was visiting England between September 18
and October 20, 1599, and attended two plays. In
his journal, translated by Ernest Schanzer in the article, “Thomas Platter’s Observations on the Elizabethan Stage,” published in Notes & Queries in 1956,
Platter described one of the plays that he saw and
many scholars believe he is writing about Shakespeare’s play, Julius Caesar, being performed at The
Globe:
After lunch on September 21st, at about two o’clock, I
and my party crossed the river, and there in the house
with the thatched roof we saw an excellent
performance of the tragedy of the first Emperor Julius
Caesar with about fifteen characters; after the play,
according to their custom they did a most elegant and
curious dance, two dressed in men’s clothes, and two
in women’s.

Not published during Shakespeare’s lifetime,
Julius Caesar appeared for the first time seven years
after his death in the First Folio of 1623. The play
appeared in the Folio as The Tragedy of Julius Caesar but was listed as The Life and Death of Julius
Caesar in the table of contents. The text of Julius
Caesar, as it appears in the Folio, is relatively errorfree and has the reputation of being the least corrupt
text printed in the Folio. Because the play is so rich

Introduction to Julius Caesar

in stage directions, it is thought that the compositors of the 1623 Folio were most likely working
from a prompt book or a transcript of that document. A prompt book is a copy of the text used by
the stage manager of a theatre. It is marked with
character entrances and exits, blocking, props, and
special effects such as offstage shouts, music, or
sounds of thunder and lightening.

Shakespeare’s sources
The majority of Shakespeare’s information about the
people and events in Julius Caesar was taken from
the work of the Greek historian, Plutarch (46?–120?
A.D.). Sir Thomas North, working from the French
version of Plutarch’s works translated by Jacques
Amyot, published an English language version of
Plutarch’s Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans in
1579. It was reprinted in 1595 with minimal changes
and again in 1603 with the addition of the life of
Octavius Caesar. Working from North’s translations,
Shakespeare used material from the Lives of Julius
Caesar, Marcus Antonius, and Marcus Brutus.
Because Plutarch was as interested in the moral
characteristics of his subjects as he was in the historical facts, Shakespeare found very useful information
in the stories that would translate well onto the theatrical stage. Plutarch’s telling of the lives of Caesar,
Antony, and Brutus is rich with anecdotes about the
characters as well as descriptions of appearance and
personality traits. Being the consummate playwright,
however, Shakespeare was able to embellish the stories adding compressed action, heightened drama,
and powerful speeches as well as internal and external conflict.
Many speeches from the play are taken directly
from North’s translation and are only rephrased to
fit into blank verse. For example, in the Life of Brutus, Plutarch records Brutus as saying, “It rejoiceth
my heart, that not one of my friends hath failed me
at my need.” Shakespeare has Brutus say, “My heart
doth joy that yet in all my life / I found no man but

19

was true to me” (V.5.34–35). The Forum speeches,
as delivered by Brutus and Antony, are results of
Shakespeare’s imagination and proof of his enduring
genius.
Other sources that Shakespeare may have used
for Julius Caesar include a biography of Julius Caesar by John Higgins in A Mirror for Magistrates and
Chaucer’s “The Monk’s Tale” from The Canterbury
Tales, in which Brutus and Cassius are seen as spiteful assassins and Caesar becomes an honorable sacrifice. Shakespeare my also have been influenced by
Dante’s Divine Comedy, in which Brutus and Cassius are seen in the lowest circle of hell alongside
Judas Iscariot.

Performance history
The first performance of Julius Caesar occurred in
1599. According to the Swiss traveler, Thomas Platter, the play was “very well acted” and “elaborately
costumed.” Although most costuming in Elizabethan
theatres was minimal, it is conjectured that there was
some classical costuming in the production of Julius
Caesar including the use of breastplates and plumed
helmets. The play was extremely popular with the
original audience and Leonard Digges wrote about
the enthusiastic audiences for the play as late as the
1620s. There is proof that the play was performed at
Whitehall in 1611 and 1612, at Saint James in January of 1636 and at the Cock Pit in the same year.
The play was performed for Charles I in 1637 and
remained an audience favorite right up to 1642 when
the theatres were closed because of the English
Civil War.
When Charles II was restored to the throne in
1660, the theatres were reopened. Julius Caesar was
included in the repertoire of Thomas Kilgrew’s Company in the 1660s and was one of the few plays written by Shakespeare that remained popular in the late
seventeenth century. With many changes to the
script and alterations to the major characters, Julius
Caesar continued to draw audiences into the theatre.

20

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

A 1953 film poster potraying the assassination of Julius Caesar.
Everett Collection

From 1708 to 1728 the character of Brutus took
center stage in productions of the play. Famous
actors of the time, such as Thomas Betterton, Barton Booth, and James Quin all took their turns playing the character that was being performed as the
stoical and dignified hero of the play. The text was
often altered so that Caesar became a frightening
tyrant and the character of Antony was restructured
to be a freedom fighter, played by such luminaries as
Edward Kynaston, Robert Wilks, and William Milward. The play was often cut and rearranged to make
the focus of the play a battle between good and evil
or ambition and liberty. Fearing the audience’s reaction to the violence, the scene with Cinna the poet
was cut so as not to offend the audience; Portia’s gash
was moved from her thigh to her arm for the same
reason. During the years of 1750–1780, Julius Caesar was revived almost every year with 150 performances in London.

The play, appealing
to the ideals of the early
American settlers, was
first performed in America on June 1, 1770, in
Philadelphia. An advertisement for the play read:
“The noble struggles for
liberty by that renowned
patriot, Marcus Brutus.”
America’s connection to
Julius Caesar took an
interesting turn during
the American Civil War.
President Abraham Lincoln was assassinated by a
member of one of the
most famous acting families of the time, John
Wilkes Booth. Booth’s
father, Junius Brutus
Booth, was named after the Brutus who had murdered Julius Caesar. Both John Wilkes and his father
Junius Brutus performed in a benefit performance of
Julius Caesar, staged to raise money to erect a statue
of William Shakespeare in New York’s Central Park
on November 25, 1864. Four months later, during
a performance of Our American Cousin, John Wilkes
Booth shot and killed President Lincoln. Booth
jumped from the president’s box to the stage shouting the motto of the state of Virginia, “Sic Semper
Tyrannis” (Thus Be It Ever To Tyrants).
Great scenic spectacles that prided themselves
on realistic sets, lavish costumes, and huge crowds of
people on stage (as opposed to focusing on the content of the script being performed) dominated the
theatre in the early nineteenth century. John Phillip
Kemble, working at the Theatre Royal and Covent
Garden, turned Julius Caesar into a sensational event
that was visually stunning but again altered Shakespeare’s script to fit the mores and ideals of the time.

Introduction to Julius Caesar

Brutus remained a lofty patriot and the scene in
which Antony and Octavius mark people for death
was cut. Herbert Beerbohm Tree, managing Her
Majesty’s Theatre in 1898, cut both scenes and characters to make Antony the star of the play and his
production became the defining production of Julius
Caesar for the next twenty years. W. C. Macready,
who played at one time or another both Brutus and
Cassius, maintained the grandiose style of Kemble
and Tree but, seeing the richness of the characters as
drawn by Shakespeare, began to play the men as
written with both their positive and negative qualities. He also made the assassination scene realistic
and bloody and set the stage for the reinstatement of
the “original” text in the twentieth century.
In Act III, Scene 1, of Julius Caesar, Shakespeare
has Cassius ask, “How many ages hence / Shall this
our lofty scene be acted over / In states unborn and
accents yet unknown!” Reviewing the twentieth century productions of Julius Caesar, one might be
tempted to add prophet to Shakespeare’s list of
accomplishments. With the majority of the text
restored to Shakespeare’s
script, the themes and
character conflicts begin
to take precedence over
the visual presentation.
Modern producers and
directors became aware of
the contemporary nature
of the themes in Julius
Caesar and productions of
the twentieth century
reflected that discovery.
On the modern stage,
Caesar has become versions of Hitler, Mussolini,
and Fidel Castro. In a
production at the Barons
Court Theatre in 1993, a
woman played Caesar as a A modern stage production of Julius Caesar.
character reminiscent of Clive Barda/PAL

21

former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.
The crowds have at times become Nazi rallies and
audiences have actually been encouraged to participate as members of the mob in several productions.
Caesar’s influence after his death has been represented with huge statues left on stage to tower over
the action and, in 1957, Glenn Byam Shaw, in his
production at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre in
Stratford, England, projected a star that was prominent during the funeral scene and again over the
plains of Philippi. Julius Caesar, along with all of
Shakespeare’s plays, with their universal themes and
uncanny understanding of human nature, will continue to find a place on the stage and in the hearts of
audiences everywhere.

Criticism
The first critics, writing at the end of the seventeenth
century, were not kind to Julius Caesar. Critics such
as Thomas Rymer and John Dennis expressed their
dissatisfaction with the minor role that Caesar had

22

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

in a play that bore his name and with what they felt
were historical inaccuracies. Writing in 1817,
William Hazlitt, in his book, Characters of Shakespeares Plays, disapproved of the fact that Caesar, as
drawn by Shakespeare, was not like “the portrait
given of him in his commentaries.”
In addition to what many felt was the disregard
of the unity of time, place, and action, the major
complaint in much of the early criticism of the play
lay with the hero. If Julius Caesar, as written by
Shakespeare, was the hero of the play, he was, at best,
a deficient hero. Charles Gildon in his preface to
Julius Caesar in Nicholas Rowe’s 1710 edition of
Shakespeare’s works, claimed that the true hero of
the piece was Brutus and that opinion held for
almost 200 years. Samuel Johnson exonerated the
play in his Preface of 1765 and Herman Ulrici, writing in 1839, found a thematic unity to the play never
acknowledged before. This led to a renewed interest
in the play by critics in the nineteenth century.
In the early twentieth century, critics such as
M.W. MacCallum began studying the play as it
referred to Plutarch, finding a new historical interest in Shakespeare’s source material. G. Wilson
Knight, writing in the 1930s, discovered much of
interest in Shakespeare’s use of language and imagery;
the characters of Caesar and Brutus were appreciated
for their human ambiguities during this time period
by such critics as Dover Wilson. Character study
gave way to the examination of the play’s moral and
political themes, and critics such as Harley GranvilleBarker in 1947 and R.A. Foakes in 1954 found the
play’s unity in its political themes. In the latter part
of the twentieth century, the play and its political
overtones underwent scrutiny by both the New Historicists and the Cultural Materialists. Coppelia
Kahn in her 1997 book, Roman Shakespeare: Warriors, Wounds and Women, gives a very interesting
look at the Roman plays, including Julius Caesar,

from a feminist perspective. As Shakespearean criticism moves into the twenty-first century, there seems
to be a movement towards reexamining Shakespeare
in the context in which it was written. As David
Scott Kastan writes in Shakespeare After Theory
(1999), the movement is to:
...restore Shakespeare’s artistry to the earliest conditions
of its realization and intelligibility: to the
collaborations of the theater in which the plays were
acted, to the practices of the book trade in which they
were published, to the unstable political world of late
Tudor and early Stuart England in which the plays
were engaged by their various publics.

Characters in the Play

23

CHARACTERS IN THE PLAY

Marc Antony
A loyal friend and
supporter of Caesar.

ers of
the Triu
after J
mvirat
ulius C
e
aesar's formed
death

fter

memb

ed a
form
rate th
mvi
Triu r's dea
a
the
aes
s of
ber ulius C
J

mem
Leptius
A Roman General
resposible for the
reconciliation of
Antony and Octavius.

Lucius
Brutus' servant.

Calpurnia
Caesar's wife.

Octavius Caesar
Julius Caesar's
nephew and heir.

Portia
Brutus' wife.

Strato
Brutus' servant.

Casca
A conspirator with Brutus.
Soothsayer
A fortune-teller who
tries to warn Julius
Caesar of his fate.

Julius Caesar
Roman Emperor.

Marcus Brutus
A Roman senator.
A leader of the
conspiracy against
Julius Caesar.

Decius Brutus
A conspirator with Brutus.
Cinna
A conspirator with Brutus.
Metullus Cimber
A conspirator with Brutus.
Trebonius
A conspirator with Brutus.

Caius Cassius
A Roman concerned
with Caesar's rise to
power. A leader of
company against
Julius Caesar.

Cinna
A poet fatally
confused with Cinna
the conspirator.

Caius Ligarius
A conspirator with Brutus.

24

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

CLIFFSCOMPLETE

JULIUS CAESAR

ACT I
Scene 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Scene 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Scene 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46

Cassuis Fellow, come from the throng; look upon Caesar.
Caesar What say ’st thou to me now? Speak once again.
Soothsayer Beware the ides of March.
Caesar He is a dreamer. Let us leave him. Pass.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I,
Scene 1

Act I, Scene 1

27

A rowdy group of plebians or commoners have gathered in the streets of
Rome to celebrate both the Feast of the Lupercal and Julius Caesar’s
triumphant return to Rome after defeating the last of his enemies, the sons
of Pompey. Two tribunes, Marullus and Flavius, chastise the crowd for
adoring Caesar and for celebrating as if it were a holiday. The crowd
guiltily disperses and Marullus and Flavius depart to vandalize Caesar’s
statues.

ACT I, SCENE 1.
Rome, a street.

NOTES

[Enter FLAVIUS, MARULLUS, and certain commoners
over the stage.]
Flavius Hence! home, you idle creatures, get you
home!
Is this a holiday? What, know you not,
Being mechanical, you ought not to walk
Upon a labouring day without the sign
Of your profession? Speak, what trade art thou?

S.D.

3.

over the stage: the commoners cross the stage
before halting. In most productions, they enter first,
with Flavius and Marullus following them.

Being mechanical: being artisans or workers.

4–5.

sign / Of your profession: dress or symbol of your
trade.

11.

cobbler: this means bungler as well as shoemaker
and confuses Marullus. The cobbler puns throughout his speeches.

16.

soles: of shoes, with a pun on soul.

17.

naughty: insolent. A stronger term for the Elizabethans than for us today.

5

Carpenter Why sir, a carpenter.
Marullus Where is thy leather apron and thy rule?
What dost thou with thy best apparel on?
You, sir, what trade are you?
Cobbler Truly sir, in respect of a fine workman, I
am but, as you would say, a cobbler.

10

Marullus But what trade art thou? Answer me
directly.
Cobbler A trade, sir, that I hope I may use with a
safe conscience, which is indeed, sir, a mender of
bad soles.

15

Flavius What trade, thou knave? Thou naughty
knave, what trade?
Cobbler Nay, I beseech you sir, be not out with me,
yet if thou be out, sir, I can mend you.

knave: base and crafty rogue.
20

19.

out: angry.

20.

out: have shoes out at the sole, or worn out.

23.

cobble you: hit with stones

Marullus What mean’st thou by that? Mend me,
thou saucy fellow?
Cobbler Why, sir, cobble you.

28

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I, Scene 1

Flavius Thou art a cobbler, art thou?
Cobbler Truly sir, all that I live by is with the awl.
I meddle with no tradesman’s matters nor women’s
matters, but withal — I am indeed, sir, a surgeon to
old shoes. When they are in great danger, I recover
them. As proper men as ever trod upon neat’s leather
have gone upon my handiwork.

25

Marullus Wherefore rejoice? What conquest brings
he home?
What tributaries follow him to Rome?
To grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels?
You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless
things!
O you hard hearts, you cruel men of Rome!
Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft
Have you climbed up to walls and battlements,
To towers and windows, yea, to chimney tops,
Your infants in your arms, and there have sat
The livelong day, with patient expectation,
To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome.
And when you saw his chariot but appear,
Have you not made an universal shout,
That Tiber trembled underneath her banks
To hear the replication of your sounds
Made in her concave shores?
And do you now put-on your best attire?
And do you now cull out a holiday?
And do you now strew flowers in his way
That comes in triumph over Pompey’s blood?
Be gone!
Run to your houses, fall upon your knees,
Pray to the gods to intermit the plague
That needs must light on this ingratitude.
Flavius Go, go, good countrymen, and for this fault
Assemble all the poor men of your sort;

The cobbler continues to have verbal fun at the
expense of Flavius and Marullus. Here he says
that he is above “meddling” with trade, or ordinary work, just as he is above pursuing women.
He gives himself the grandiose title of surgeon
“withal,” i.e., a surgeon with an awl. In mending
or re-covering shoes he makes them “recover,” or
heals them.

29.

neat’s leather: oxhide.

35.

triumph: a triumphal procession through Rome.
Caesar is returning from the defeat of Pompey’s
sons in Spain.

37.

tributaries: conquered rulers bringing tributes of
money.

43–49.

Here Shakespeare combines the London of his
audience (“towers, windows, chimney tops”) with
the Rome of Pompey’s chariot and the river Tiber.

50.

replication: echo, reverberation.

51.

concave shores: overhanging banks

53.

Cull out: choose to take. This is meant ironically,
since the artisans could not choose their own holidays.

55.

Pompey’s blood: the blood of Pompey’s sons and
his armies.

58.

intermit: hold off.

30

Flavius But wherefore art not in thy shop to-day?
Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?
Cobbler Truly sir, to wear out their shoes, to get
myself into more work. But indeed sir, we make holiday to see Caesar and to rejoice in his triumph.

25–28.

35

40

45

50

55

60

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I, Scene 1

Draw them to Tiber banks, and weep your tears
Into the channel, till the lowest stream
Do kiss the most exalted shores of all.
[Exeunt the commoners.]
See, whe’r their basest mettle be not moved.
They vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness.
Go you down that way towards the Capitol;
This way will I. Disrobe the images
If you do find them decked with ceremonies.
Marullus May we do so?
You know it is the feast of Lupercal.
Flavius It is no matter. Let no images
Be hung with Caesar’s trophies. I’ll about
And drive away the vulgar from the streets.
So do you too, where you perceive them thick.
These growing feathers, plucked from Caesar’s wing
Will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
Who else would soar above the view of men
And keep us all in servile fearfulness.

65

64.

most exalted shores: highest banks.

65.

whe’r: frequent in Shakespeare for whether.

29

mettle: temperament, disposition.
moved: affected, changed; i.e., to guilt at forgetting
Pompey.
67.

Capitol: the Temple of Jupiter on the Capitoline Hill
where the state business of Rome was transacted.

68.

images: statues.

69.

ceremonies: ornaments such as garlands or
wreaths.

74.

the vulgar: the common people.

76–79.

The image is from falconry, with Caesar as the falcon whose “wing” (power) will be weaker if his
“growing feathers” (popular support) are plucked,
causing him to fly at a lower “pitch” (height).

70

75

[Exeunt.]
COMMENTARY

he play opens on a scene of raucous public celebration. Not only is it February 15, the Feast of the
T
Lupercal, but it is also the day Julius Caesar triumphantly returns from Spain after defeating the last of
Rome’s external adversaries. The crowd of revelers is
happy to have a day away from their usual tasks and,
because the day is considered a high festival, plenty of
government-supplied food and drink is available for all.
The Lupercalian holiday, an ancient rite of both purgation and fertility, honored the gods Lupercus and
Faunus as well as the twin brothers Romulus and
Remus, the legendary founders of Rome. It seems
appropriate that Shakespeare chose this particular
feast as the setting for the return of Julius Caesar to
Rome. Historically, Caesar returned from Spain in October of 45 B.C., but by dramatically compressing the
events, Shakespeare draws a comparison between
Romulus and Remus, the founders of Rome, and Caesar,
the founder of a new Roman order. By implication, the

religious festival, combined with Caesar’s ceremonial
entrance into the city, gives Caesar an immediate godlike aura and would possibly remind the viewer of
Jesus’ triumphant entrance into Jerusalem before his
betrayal and death on the cross.
The merriment of the Roman people is short-lived,
however, as the scene is quickly broken up by the intrusion of two Roman Tribunes, Marullus and Flavius. The
two men insult the crowd and admonish them for being
idle on a workday. They also question why the commoners walk about “without the sign of your profession.” This is a reference to an Elizabethan law that
required workers to identify themselves by wearing their
work clothes and carrying the tools of their trade.
Shakespeare often used Elizabethan references in his
plays, regardless of the actual timeframe in which the
story was taking place, as a way of making his work
more accessible to his audience. Another example of
Shakespeare using Elizabethan references in this scene

30

Act I, Scene 1

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar
Although the majority of the people of Rome are happy
with their leader, some are not. This small-scale conflict
will be reflected in the next scene when the full-blown
conspiracy against Caesar begins to take shape. Shakespeare also uses the first scene in the play to establish
“the mob” as a character with its own life and set of
characteristics, who can be moved to change its mind
about an issue with a few well-chosen words.

A relief of Romulus and Remus, from the 1st century, A.D.
Mark Smith/Ancient Art & Architecture Collection Ltd.

is the reference to towers and chimney tops. There
were no towers or chimneys in ancient Rome, but these
anachronisms, chronologically misplaced events, words
or details, bring the play into alignment with the experiences of the audience for whom the play was written.

Finally, the scene introduces one of the many images
that enhances the play as well as one of the play’s recurring themes. The word “blood,” implying the dual meaning of “life-nourishing” and “death-inducing,” is used
consistently throughout the play. Here, Caesar has triumphed over Pompey’s blood, but there will soon be a time
when Caesar’s body, lying bloody at the base of Pompey’s
statue, will be triumphed by Pompey. This image illustrates
a theme in Julius Caesar, that blood begets blood.

Shakespeare wrote the majority of his plays in blank
verse, but he often changed from verse to prose to indicate the social status of a character. In this scene, the
tribunes speak verse and the commoners use prose. In
a delightful bit of wordplay, the Carpenter and the Cobbler frustrate the Tribunes with their evasive puns and
bawdy innuendoes. Puns, a play on words that are
spelled or sound the same but have different meanings,
have often been called the lowest form of humor, but
Elizabethan audiences delighted in them.
In general, the crowd is content with the harmony
and abundance in their lives and is more concerned
with parties than with politics. Infuriated by the mob’s
indifference, Marullus questions the crowd’s memories
and motivations. How is Caesar’s returning from the
defeat of another Roman a victory? Marullus also
underscores the fickleness of the people by reminding
them that it was not so long ago that they stood in the
very same place celebrating the return of Pompey but
now celebrate the return of the man who, “comes in triumph over Pompey’s blood.” The Tribunes scold the
onlookers and suggest that the gods should send a
plague for this type of ingratitude and the chastised
crowd silently and guiltily disperses.
The conflict between the factions of commoner and
official serves two dramatic functions. First, Shakespeare puts the central conflict of the play into place.

The birth of Julius Caesar.
Ronald Sheridan/Ancient Art & Architecture Collection Ltd.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I,
Scene 2

Act I, Scene 2

31

Caesar enters with his procession, which includes, among others, his
wife Calpurnia and Marc Antony. Caesar is accosted by a soothsayer who
warns him to “Beware the Ides of March.” Caesar dismisses the man as a
dreamer and moves on to begin the festivities for the Feast Day. Left
behind are two men, Brutus and Cassius. Cassius strikes up a
conversation with Brutus and learns that Brutus is not happy with
Caesar’s sharp rise to power. Cassius, also wary of Caesar’s power,
attempts to enlist support from Brutus in an effort to do something about
Caesar before the people crown him king, giving him absolute power.
While Brutus and Cassius are having this conversation, shouts are heard
from offstage. Antony has offered the crown to Caesar and he has refused
it in a ploy to make the people of Rome beg him to take the crown.
Instead, the people cheer his decision and Caesar is forced to reject the
crown a total of three times. The anger he must suppress causes Caesar
to suffer an epileptic seizure. Cassius uses Caesar’s weaknesses to
persuade Brutus to join in the conspiracy against Caesar. The two men
agree to meet at a later time to discuss the matter more fully.

ACT I, SCENE 2.
Rome, a public place.

NOTES

[Flourish. Enter CAESAR, ANTONY (for the course),
CALPURNIA, PORTIA, DECIUS, CICERO, BRUTUS,
CASSIUS, CASCA, a great crowd following, among them a
Soothsayer; after them, MARULLUS and FLAVIUS]

S.D.

Flourish: an extended sounding of trumpets, used on
the Elizabethan stage to announce the entrance of
a procession, or of a ruler and his court. A “sennet”
(I.2.24) was a briefer version.

S.D.

for the course: stripped for running.

Caesar Calpurnia.
Casca

Peace, ho! Caesar speaks.

Caesar

Calpurnia.

Calpurnia Here, my lord.
Caesar Stand you directly in Antonius’ way
When he doth run his course. Antonius.
Antony Caesar, my lord?
Caesar Forget not in your speed, Antonius,
To touch Calpurnia; for our elders say
The barren, touched in this holy chase,

3.
5

Antonius: Shakespeare occasionally alters the form
of names to maintain the rhythm of the iambic pentameter verse. Here he needs an extra syllable, but
compare line 204, below.

32

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I, Scene 2

Shake off their sterile curse.
Antony
I shall remember
When Caesar says ‘Do this,’ it is performed.

10

Caesar Set on, and leave no ceremony out.
[Flourish.]
Soothsayer Caesar!
Caesar Ha! Who calls?
Casca Bid every noise be still. Peace yet again!
Caesar Who is it in the press that calls on me?
I hear a tongue shriller than all the music
Cry ‘Caesar!’ Speak. Caesar is turned to hear.

15

15.

press: crowd.

18.

ides: the fifteenth day of the month.

25.

order: sequence of events.

28.

gamesome: sportive.

29.

quick: light, lively. The evidence that Brutus is
troubled by Caesar’s threat to republican freedom
appears early in the scene and Cassius is quick
to note it.

33.

I . . . eyes: i.e., I do not see in your eyes.

35–36.

You . . . friend: the metaphor is from riding. Cassius says that Brutus handles him too roughly.

Soothsayer Beware the ides of March.
Caesar

What man is that?

Brutus A soothsayer bids you beware the ides of March.
Caesar Set him before me; let me see his face.

20

Cassius Fellow, come from the throng; look upon Caesar.
Caesar What say’st thou to me now? Speak once again.
Soothsayer Beware the ides of March.
Caesar He is a dreamer. Let us leave him. Pass.
[Sennet. Exeunt all except BRUTUS and CASSIUS.]
Cassius Will you go see the order of the course?

25

Brutus Not I.
Cassius I pray you do.
Brutus I am not gamesome. I do lack some part
Of that quick spirit that is in Antony.
Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires.
I’ll leave you.
Cassius Brutus, I do observe you now of late;
I have not from your eyes that gentleness
And show of love as I was wont to have.
You bear too stubborn and too strange a hand
Over your friend that loves you.

30

35

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Brutus
Cassius,
Be not deceived. If I have veiled my look,
I turn the trouble of my countenance
Merely upon myself. Vexed I am
Of late with passions of some difference,
Conceptions only proper to myself,
Which give some soil, perhaps, to my behaviours;
But let not therefore my good friends be grieved
(Among which number, Cassius, be you one)
Nor construe any further my neglect
Than that poor Brutus, with himself at war,
Forgets the shows of love to other men.
Cassius Then, Brutus, I have much mistook your
passion;
By means wherof this breast of mine hath buried
Thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations.
Tell me, good Brutus, can you see your face?

Act I, Scene 2

40

45

33

37–39.

If . . . myself: i.e., if I have seemed unfriendly, it is
because I am concerned with my own thoughts.

39.

Merely: wholly.

40.

passions . . . difference: conflicting emotions.

41.

proper: belonging.

42.

soil: blemish.

45.

construe: understand (with the accent on the first
syllable).

48.

passion: emotion.

49.

By . . . buried: i.e., I have therefore concealed.

59.

best respect: highest reputation.

60.

(Except immortal Caesar): spoken with quiet irony;
Cassius begins to be specific about what he thinks
is amiss in Rome.

62.

Brutus . . . eyes: i.e., that Brutus saw where he himself stood; not blind to the situation.

68.

glass: mirror

69.

modestly: without exaggeration.

71.

jealous: suspicious.

50

Brutus No, Cassius; for the eye sees not itself
But by reflection, by some other things.
Cassius ’Tis just.
And it is very much lamented, Brutus,
That you have no such mirrors as will turn
Your hidden worthiness into your eye,
That you might see your shadow. I have heard
Where many of the best respect in Rome,
(Except immortal Caesar), speaking of Brutus,
And groaning underneath this age’s yoke,
Have wished that noble Brutus had his eyes.
Brutus Into what dangers would you lead me,
Cassius,
That you would have me seek into myself
For that which is not in me?
Cassius Therefore, good Brutus, be prepared to
hear;
And since you know you cannot see yourself
So well as by reflection, I, your glass,
Will modestly discover to yourself
That of yourself which you yet know not of.
And be not jealous on me, gentle Brutus.

55

60

65

70

34

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I, Scene 2

Were I a common laughter, or did use
To stale with ordinary oaths my love
To every new protester; if you know
That I do fawn on men and hug them hard,
And after scandal them; or if you know
That I profess myself in banqueting
To all the rout, then hold me dangerous.

laughter: object of laughter or ridicule. Some editors print “laugher”.

73.

stale: cheapen.
ordinary: a tavern/common

75

[Flourish and shout.]
Brutus What means this shouting? I do fear the
people
Choose Caesar for their king.

72.

80

74.

new protester: i.e., every newcomer who declares
his friendship.

75.

fawn: physical gesture

76.

scandal: slander.

77–78.

profess . . . rout: proclaim my friendship to everyone (“all the rout”) while celebrating.

78.

dangerous: unreliable, unable to keep secrets.

S.D.

shout: here and at line 132 dramatically reminds
Brutus and Cassius (and the audience) of Caesar’s
popularity with the mob.

87.

indifferently: impartially, with equal favor.

88.

so . . . as: assist me because.

96.

such . . . myself: i.e., another man like myself, in
this case Caesar.

101.

chafing with: beating on.

105.

accoutred: in armor.

107.

buffet: beat back.

108.

lusty sinews: strong muscles.

Cassius
Ay, do you fear it?
Then must I think you would not have it so.
Brutus I would not Cassius; yet I love him well.
But wherefore do you hold me here so long?
What is it that you would impart to me?
If it he aught toward the general good,
Set honour in one eye and death i’ th’ other,
And I will look on both indifferently;
For let the gods so speed me as I love
The name of honour more than I fear death.
Cassius I know that virtue to be in you, Brutus,
As well as I do know your outward favour.
Well, honour is the subject of my story.
I cannot tell what you and other men
Think of this life; but for my single self,
I had as lief not be as live to be
In awe of such a thing as I myself.
I was borne free as Caesar; so were you.
We both have fed as well, and we can both
Endure the winter’s cold as well as he.
For once, upon a raw and gusty day,
The troubled Tiber chafing with her shores,
Caesar said to me, ‘Dar’st thou, Cassius, now
Leap in with me into this angry flood
And swim to yonder point?’ Upon the word,
Accoutred as I was, I plunged in
And bade him follow. So indeed he did.
The torrent roared, and we did buffet it
With lusty sinews, throwing it aside

85

90

95

100

105

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

And stemming it with hearts of controversy.
But ere we could arrive the point proposed,
Caesar cried, ‘Help me Cassius, or I sink!’
I, as Aeneas, our great ancestor,
Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder
The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber
Did I the tired Caesar. And this man
Is now become a god, and Cassius is
A wretched creature and must bend his body
If Caesar carelessly but nod on him.
He had a fever when he was in Spain,
And when the fit was on him, I did mark
How he did shake. ’Tis true, this god did shake.
His coward lips did from their colour fly,
And that same eye whose bend doth awe the world
Did lose his lustre. I did hear him groan.
Ay, and that tongue of his that bade the Romans
Mark him and write his speeches in their books,
‘Alas,’ it cried, ‘give me some drink, Titinius,’
As a sick girl! Ye gods, it doth amaze me
A man of such a feeble temper should
So get the start of the majestic world
And bear the palm alone.

Act I, Scene 2

35

109.

hearts of controversy: in rivalry.

117.

bend: bow in reverence.

130.

get the start: i.e., a head start; the metaphor from
the running of a race is carried on in the victor’s
“palm” in the next line.

136.

Colossus: the huge statue of Apollo at the harbour
of Rhodes. It was erroneously thought that its legs
spanned the harbour entrance.

143.

sounded: proclaimed.

146.

conjure: pronounce as in a spell.

110

115

120

125

130

[Shout. Flourish.]
Brutus Another general shout?
I do believe that these applauses are
For some new honours that are heaped on Caesar.
Cassius Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow
world
Like a Colossus, and we petty men
Walk under his huge legs and peep about
To find ourselves dishonourable graves.
Men at some time are masters of their fates.
The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,
But in ourselves, that we are underlings.
‘Brutus,’ and ‘Caesar.’ What should be in that
‘Caesar’?
Why should that name be sounded more than yours?
Write them together: yours is as fair a name.
Sound them: it doth become the mouth as well.
Weigh them: It is as heavy. Conjure with ’em:

135

140

145

36

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I, Scene 2

‘Brutus’ will start a spirit as soon as ‘Caesar.’
Now in the names of all the gods at once,
Upon what meat doth this our Caesar feed
That he is grown so great? Age thou art shamed.
Rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods.
When went there by an age since the great Flood
But it was famed with more than with one man?
When could they say (till now) that talked of Rome
That her wide walks encompassed but one man?
Now is it Rome indeed, and room enough,
When there is in it but one only man.
O, you and I have heard our fathers say
There was a Brutus once that would have brooked
Th’ eternal devil to keep his state in Rome
As easily as a king.
Brutus That you do love me I am nothing jealous.
What you would work me to, I have some aim.
How I have thought of this, and of these times,
I shall recount hereafter. For this present,
I would not so (with love I might entreat you)
Be any further moved. What you have said
I will consider; what you have to say
I will with patience hear, and find a time
Both meet to hear and answer such high things.
Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this:
Brutus had rather be a villager
Than to repute himself a son of Rome
Under these hard conditions as this time
Is like to lay upon us.

147.

start: invoke, as in a prayer to a god.

152.

great Flood: the classical or pagan version of
Noah’s Flood.

153.

But . . . man: i.e., has there ever been another age
in which a single man has been in this position?

155.

walks: public parks and gardens that have
become (Cassius suggests) Caesar’s private preserve.

156.

Rome . . . room: these words were pronounced
alike by the Elizabethans, and Cassius’ pun is
meant to suggest that all of Rome is now the single “room” of one man.

159–61.

i.e., would no more have permitted a king in
Rome than a devil.

162.

nothing jealous: have no doubt. The Elizabethans
frequently used “jealous” in the sense of
suspicious.

166.

so: in this manner.

170.

meet: proper.

S.D.

train: followers.

150

155

160

165

170

175

Cassius
I am glad
That my weak words have struck but thus much
show
Of fire from Brutus.
[Enter CAESAR and his train.]
Brutus The games are done, and Caesar is returning.
Cassius As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve,
And he will (after his sour fashion) tell you
What hath proceeded worthy note to-day.
Brutus I will do so. But look you, Cassius,

180

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

The angry spot doth glow on Caesar’s brow,
And all the rest look like a chidden train.
Calpurnia’s cheek is pale, and Cicero
Looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes
As we have seen him in the Capitol,
Being crossed in conference by some senators.

Act I, Scene 2

37

184.

chidden: scolded.

186.

ferret: red

188.

crossed: opposed.

192–94.

Caesar’s distinction between “fat” and “lean”
repeats the ancient proverbial notion of “fat” as
amiable and satisfied, “lean” as dissatisfied and
envious.

197.

well given: well disposed.

199.

Yet . . . fear: if I were capable of being afraid.

203.

Quite . . . men: i.e., through their actions and into
their motives.

204.

music: dislike of music in Shakespeare’s plays and
for the Elizabethans generally represented a defect,
or disharmony of character. Note later in the play
Brutus’ fondness for music (IV.3).

205.

sort: way.

217.

sad: troubled.

185

Cassius Casca will tell us what the matter is.
Caesar Antonius.

190

Antony Caesar?
Caesar Let me have men about me that are fat,
Sleek-headed men, and such as sleep a-nights.
Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look.
He thinks too much. Such men are dangerous.

195

Antony Fear him not Caesar; he’s not dangerous.
He is a noble Roman, and well given.
Caesar Would he were fatter! But I fear him not.
Yet if my name were liable to fear,
I do not know the man I should avoid
So soon as that spare Cassius. He reads much,
He is a great observer, and he looks
Quite through the deeds of men. He loves no plays
As thou dost, Antony; he hears no music.
Seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort
As if he mocked himself and scorned his spirit
That could be moved to smile at anything.
Such men as he be never at heart’s ease
Whiles they behold a greater than themselves,
And therefore are they very dangerous.
I rather tell thee what is to be feared
Than what I fear; for always I am Caesar.
Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,
And tell me truly what thou think’st of him.

200

205

210

[Sennet. Exeunt CAESAR and his train. CASCA remains.]
Casca You pulled me by the cloak. Would you
speak with me?
Brutus Ay, Casca. Tell us what hath chanced to-day
That Caesar looks so sad.
Casca Why, you were with him, were you not?

215

38

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I, Scene 2

Brutus I should not then ask Casca what had
chanced.
Casca Why, there was a crown offered him; and
being offered him, he put it by the back of his hand
thus; and then the people fell a-shouting.

220

Brutus What was the second noise for?
Casca Why, for that too.
Cassius They shouted thrice. What was the last cry
for?

225

Casca Why, for that too.
Brutus Was the crown offered him thrice?
Casca Ay, marry was’t! and he put it by thrice,
every time gentler than other; and at every puttingby mine honest neighbours shouted.

229.

marry: an oath, by (the Virgin) Mary.

234.

gentle: used here in two senses, (1) noble, or
well-born, and (2) mild or amiable (ironic when
applied to the “sour” Casca).

238.

coronets: small crown, or perhaps a laurel
wreath.

240

240.

fain: gladly.

245

245.

chopt: chapped.

249.

swounded: fainted.

252.

But soft: slowly/just a moment.

230

Cassius Who offered him the crown?
Casca Why, Antony.
Brutus Tell us the manner of it, gentle Casca.
Casca I can as well be hanged as tell the manner
of it. It was mere foolery; I did not mark it. I saw
Mark Antony offer him a crown — yet ’twas not a
crown neither, ’twas one of these coronets — and, as
I told you, he put it by once; but for all that, to my
thinking, he would fain have had it. Then he offered
it to him again; then he put it by again; but to my
thinking, he was very loath to lay his fingers off it.
And then he offered it the third time. He put it the
third time by; and still as he refused it, the rabblement hooted, and clapped their chopt hands, and
threw tip their sweaty nightcaps, and uttered such a
deal of stinking breath because Caesar refused the
crown that it had almost choked Caesar; for he
swounded and fell down at it. And for mine own
part, I durst not laugh, for fear of opening my lips
and receiving the bad air.
Cassius But soft, I pray you. What, did Caesar
swound?

235

250

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Casca He fell down in the market place and foamed
at the mouth and was speechless.

Act I, Scene 2

255

Brutus ’Tis very like; he hath the falling sickness.

256.

falling sickness: Brutus refers to Caesar’s epilepsy.
Cassius is quick to take up the phrase and give it
another meaning. They are “falling” through Caesar’s rise.

260.

rag-tag: ragged.

267.

plucked me ope: opened. Caesar wants to assure
the crowd of his sincerity.

269.

occupation: working man.

286.

Greek to me: In fact, Plutarch says specifically that
Casca could speak Greek. In this phrase (which has
become a part of the language), Shakespeare makes
Casca disclaim any knowledge that might make him
appear sophisticated or polished. He maintains his
rough-hewn “blunt” and “sour” character. See Brutus’ and Cassius’ comments at line 298 ff. below.

288.

put to silence: a euphemism for executed.

Cassius No, Caesar hath it not; but you and I,
And honest Casca, we have the falling sickness.
Casca I know not what you mean by that, but I
am sure Caesar fell down. If the rag-tag people did
not clap him and hiss him, according as he pleased
and displeased them, as they use to do the players
in the theatre, I am no true man.

39

260

Brutus What said he when he came unto himself?
Casca Marry, before he fell down, when lie perceived the common herd was glad he refused the
crown, he plucked me ope his doublet and offered
them his throat to cut. An I had been a man of any
occupation, if I would not have taken him at a word,
I would I might go to hell among the rogues. And so
he fell. When he came to himself again, he said, if
he had done or said anything amiss, he desired their
worships to think it was his infirmity. Three or
four wenches where I stood cried ‘Alas, good soul!’
and forgave him with all their hearts. But there’s no
heed to be taken of them. If Caesar had stabbed
their mothers, they would have done no less.

265

270

275

Brutus And after that, he came thus sad away?
Casca Ay.
Cassius Did Cicero say anything?

280

Casca Ay, he spoke Greek.
Cassius To what effect?
Casca Nay, an I tell you that, I’ll ne’er look you i’
the face again. But those that understood him
smiled at one another and shook their heads; but
for mine own part, it was Greek to me. I could tell
you more news too. Marullus and Flavius, for pulling scarfs off Caesar’s images, are put to silence.
Fare you well. There was more foolery yet, if I could
remember it.

285

290

40

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I, Scene 2

Cassius Will you sup with me to-night, Casca?
Casca No, I am promised forth.
Cassius Will you dine with me to-morrow?
Casca Ay, if I be alive, and your mind hold, and
your dinner worth eating.

294.

your mind hold: (1) if you don’t change your mind,
(2) if you are still sane.

299.

quick mettle: sharp.

302.

puts . . . form: pretends to be slow and simple.

310.

the world: i.e., the Roman world.

312.

wrought: worked on, changed.

313.

that . . . disposed: its natural inclination.

314.

with their likes: with those that think as they do.

316.

bear me hard: bears me a grudge.

318.

humour: persuade by flattery. Lines 317–318 have
been variously interpreted. They may mean (1) If
I were Brutus and Brutus were Cassius, he would
not persuade me, or (2) If I were Brutus and Caesar were Cassius, Caesar would not persuade me.
The interpretation is of some importance. The
first, which seems also the likeliest, puts Cassius
(at least at this point in the play) in a particularly
cynical and cold-blooded light.

319.

several hands: different handwritings.

321–2.

great opinion / That: great respect in which.

323.

ambition: for the Elizabethans, the word had the
special meaning of unscrupulous pursuit of
power.

295

Cassius Good. I will expect you.
Casca Do so. Farewell both. [Exit.]
Brutus What a blunt fellow is this grown to be!
He was quick mettle when he went to school.
Cassius So is he now in execution
Of any bold or noble enterprise,
However he puts on this tardy form.
This rudeness is a sauce to his good wit,
Which gives men stomach to digest his words
With better appetite.

300

305

Brutus And so it is. For this time I will leave you.
To-morrow, if you please to speak with me,
I will come home to you; or if you will,
Come home to me, and I will wait for you.
Cassius I will do so. Till then, think of the world.
[Exit BRUTUS.]
Well, Brutus, thou art noble; yet I see
Thy honourable mettle may be wrought
From that it is disposed. Therefore it is meet
That noble minds keep ever with their likes;
For who so firm that cannot be seduced?
Caesar doth bear me hard; but he loves Brutus.
If I were Brutus now and he were Cassius,
He should not humour me. I will this night,
In several hands, in at his windows throw,
As if they came from several citizens,
Writings, all tending to the great opinion
That Rome holds of his name; wherein obscurely
Caesar’s ambition shall be glanced at.
And after this let Caesar seat him sure,
For we will shake him, or worse days endure. [Exit.]

310

315

320

325

glanced at: hinted at.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I, Scene 2

41

COMMENTARY

he disparity between the public image and the private man is central to Julius Caesar, and this introT
duction to Caesar certainly underscores Shakespeare’s
ability to understand and portray the complex and often
dual nature of human beings. Despite the debate that
has raged for years over who is the actual “hero” of
Julius Caesar, no clear-cut protagonist ever emerges in
the play. The simplistic beauty of this drama lies in the
fact that, just like life off of the stage, politicians and
public figures, no matter how the populace chooses to
see them, are mere mortals with the same ailments and
torments, delusions and misjudgments as the common
person.
A great flourish of trumpets signals the arrival of
Caesar and his entourage. A large crowd of people that
includes both friends and foes accompanies him.

Julius Caesar depicted as a deity in his chariot.
Mary Evans Picture Library

Although they speak no lines and are never referred to,
the stage directions indicate that Marullus and Flavius,
the chastising tribunes from the previous scene, are
part of this crowd, possibly as prisoners having already
been arrested for desecrating Caesar’s statues. The two
men in chains would serve as a potent visual image of
Caesar’s power and control over attempts to undermine
his authority. Also in the crowd are Caesar’s right-hand
man, Marc Antony, and the men who will become the
prevailing forces of the conspiracy against Caesar.
Marc Antony, also known as Marcus Antonius, was
related to Julius Caesar on his mother’s side. He had
been a staunch supporter of Caesar during the conflicts
with Pompey and had served in Caesar’s army when he
was in Gaul. In Scene 2, Antony is dressed “for the
course.” As indicated in Scene 1, it is the Feast of the

42

Act I, Scene 2

Lupercal. During the holiday, priests of the Lupercus,
dressed in loincloths made of goatskin, sacrificed goats
and a dog and smeared themselves with sacrificial
blood. They then ran through the city carrying a goatskin
thong, called a februa. Women placed themselves in
such a way that the priests could strike them with the
februa, thus assuring the women of fertility and easy
childbirth. In this short exchange, Shakespeare makes
apparent Antony’s exalted position not only as a priest
of the Luperci but as a loyal and dedicated follower of
Caesar. When asked to touch Calpurnia with his thong,
Antony’s reply, “When Caesar says ‘Do this,’ it is performed,” explicitly defines the depth of his allegiance to
the leader of Rome.
Caesar’s first words are directed at his wife, Calpurnia. She is Caesar’s third wife and the daughter of a
friend of Pompey’s, indicating that the marriage was
most likely politically motivated. Indeed, a young,
healthy bride should have been able to produce the heir
that Caesar surely desires to guarantee the continuation of his reign as leader of Rome. Caesar’s rather
brazen public acknowledgment of Calpurnia’s sterility
gives several clues to Caesar’s character and his motivations. First, he must maintain his own public image by
degrading Calpurnia. In an insensitive and rather humiliating manner, Caesar seems to place the blame for their
lack of children on his wife. However, the “sterile curse”
could be Caesar’s own aging impotence that prevents
Calpurnia from becoming pregnant. According to
Plutarch, Shakespeare’s main source for much of this
play, “The chiefest cause that made [Caesar] mortally
hated was the covetous desire he had to be called
king.” Caesar’s obvious desire to produce a male heir
may indicate that Caesar was indeed thinking along
those lines.
Just as Caesar makes it obvious that he believes in
the superstition attached to the Lupercal to cure
Calpurnia of her supposed sterility, the procession is
interrupted by the warnings of a soothsayer, a man who
sees into the future. Both the Romans of Caesar’s time
and the Elizabethans who saw the play enacted on the
stage of The Globe were very superstitious and would
have appreciated the import of prophecies, dreams, and
omens, and anticipated the dire results when those

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar
signs were ignored. Here, Caesar is warned to “Beware
the Ides of March,” but despite the fact that he has
proven to be a superstitious man when it pertains to
others, he chooses to ignore the warning and dismisses
the soothsayer as nothing more than a dreamer. Ironically, Cassius, the man who repeats the soothsayer’s
warning to Caesar, is the very man who will help to
make the prophecy come true.
Caesar’s brief exchange with the soothsayer provides more insights into Caesar’s character. He is a man
who will tempt the fates by ignoring the messages
passed to him by the soothsayer. In essence, Caesar
seems to have put himself on a par with the gods, in
control of destiny as opposed to being controlled by it.
This arrogance would have been a red flag to Elizabethan audiences that Caesar was setting himself up
for a mighty fall from grace. Also, Caesar’s use of the
third person when referring to himself suggests that
Caesar has begun to believe his own press. The references to himself combined with his disregard of
prophecy point to the fact that Caesar is actively participating in his own deification.
Followed by the crowd, Caesar leaves the stage to
watch the race. Two men, Brutus and Cassius, lag
behind and, left alone on stage, begin a dialogue that
will change the course of history. Marcus Junius Brutus, born in 85 B.C., was a nephew of Cato, one of Caesar’s most unyielding adversaries. As Cato’s nephew,
Brutus was considered an enemy of Caesar. He fought
with Pompey in Greece and was taken prisoner when
Pompey was defeated. In an effort to heal the wounds
of civil war, Caesar pardoned and set free the prisoners
of war, including Brutus. Shortly thereafter, Brutus
became a lieutenant in Caesar’s army and continued to
serve him loyally. Although Shakespeare makes no
direct mention of it in his play, it was common knowledge to most Elizabethans that Brutus’ mother, Servilia,
had had an affair with Julius Caesar. Because Brutus
was born during the time of this relationship, it was
speculated that Brutus might have actually been Caesar’s illegitimate son.
Brutus subscribed to the philosophy known as Stoicism, which maintains that the universe is completely
rational and guided by fate. Therefore, one must learn

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I, Scene 2

to accept whatever happens with a strong and tranquil
mind. Virtue, being the attainment of valor, moral excellence, and righteousness, is the only key to a happy life
and becomes the ultimate goal of the Stoic; vice is evil
and leads only to unhappiness. Stoicism encourages a
man to be centered in his intellect while suppressing his
feelings. Brutus’ attempt to maintain his emotionless
moral superiority, based in his Stoic philosophy,
becomes a double-edged sword and ultimately leads
him — and Rome — into destruction.
Caius Cassius Longinus was also an ally of Pompey,
but when he saw that Pompey’s defeat was imminent,
he changed allegiance and, after being pardoned by
Caesar, became a soldier in Caesar’s army. Cassius,
married to Brutus’ sister Junia, was Brutus’s brother-inlaw. Unlike the Stoic Brutus, Cassius was an Epicurean.
The philosophy of Epicureanism promoted the notion
that freedom from physical pain and mental trouble was
the goal of a happy life. Again, virtue, courage, and justice were considered the attributes needed to attain
wisdom, but unlike the intellectual center of stoicism,
Epicurians felt that knowledge was derived from the
senses. Brutus’ cold and
unwavering intellect offers
a direct contrast to the
fiery, passionate nature of
Cassius. Thus, as Brutus
lived in his head, Cassius
lived in his heart. Just as
Brutus’ inability to balance
head and heart will lead to
his downfall, Cassius’
inability to balance heart
and head will also lead to
his ruin.
Much of the manipulation that occurs in Julius
Caesar is achieved by the
use of flattery. In this
scene, Cassius plies Brutus
with praise and compliments. He speaks of Brutus’ worthiness and the
high respect with which he

43

is held throughout Rome and offers to mirror or reflect
Brutus’ honorable qualities for him to see. The mirror as
a reflection of the moral nature of man was a common
literary device in Renaissance literature, and Shakespeare uses this device to hold the mirror up to the
moral nature of man on many occasions throughout his
plays. More often than not, however, what is reflected
is the discord inherent in man’s sinful nature. For example, in Julius Caesar, Brutus admits that he is at war
against himself. What this internal war consists of is
revealed here in Scene 2 when the first flourishes and
shouts are heard from the crowd offstage. Brutus
admits that he fears the people have chosen Caesar as
their king but, in the same breath, swears that he loves
the man. By the end of his speech, however, it becomes
apparent that, for the determinedly Stoic Brutus, love
will never conquer or come before the need to maintain
honor.
At the admission of his fears, Cassius leaps at the
opportunity to involve Brutus in the conspiracy against
Caesar. Taking advantage of Brutus’ commitment to

Caesar passing the Rubicon.
Ronald Sheridan/Ancient Art & Architecture Collection Ltd.

44

Act I, Scene 2

honor and virtue, Cassius plays upon those words to
draw Brutus more deeply into the conspiracy. By pointing out Caesar’s weaknesses and physical imperfections, Cassius seeks to emphasize that Caesar is no
better than Brutus is. Cassius continues to build his
argument against Caesar by appealing not only to Brutus’ sense of patriotism to a free Rome but persists in
flattering Brutus with a reference to his valiant ancestor, who was noted for having overthrown King Tarquin
and creating the Roman Republic. Cassius’ words work
their magic and Brutus agrees that he has had similar
thoughts and would be willing to discuss the issue further at a safer and more convenient time.
In this scene, Shakespeare once again foreshadows
Caesar’s death and uses irony to underscore what will
become part of the dramatic unity of the play. In speaking of the power inherent in Caesar’s name, Cassius
says, “Conjure with ‘em: / ‘Brutus’ will start a spirit as
soon as ‘Caesar’. . . “ and indeed the irony is that it will
be Brutus, who in killing Caesar, will release his spirit.
By conjuring up Caesar’s spirit to be unleashed upon the
world, Brutus has in reality given the name of “Caesar”
more power in death than Caesar might have had in life.
Caesar’s spirit, which cannot be killed, will dominate the
second half of this play. Readers who feel the play
should have been called Marcus Brutus underestimate
the historical significance of Caesar’s continuing power
even after his death.
In Scene 2, Shakespeare first introduces the image
of fire that infuses the play from this point on. Fire,
which, like blood, can be either a destructive or a purifying force, represents passion and the ability to inflame
or enkindle. In lines 176–177, Brutus personifies the flint
that Cassius strikes in an effort to spark some sort of
flame to fire the conspiracy against Caesar.
When Caesar reenters the stage, the subdued nature
of the crowd, the red face of Caesar, and the pale looks
of Calpurnia signal that something of significance has
transpired offstage while Brutus and Cassius conversed
onstage. Cassius pulls Casca aside to inquire about the
events that have just taken place and Caesar notices
the men speaking together in whispers. From his
insights into Cassius’ character, it is evident that Caesar himself is a “great observer” who can “look through
the deeds of men,” but his pride and vanity will not allow
him to admit to the real danger that a man like Cassius
could pose.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar
In this play, most of what is thought to be known
about Caesar is secondhand information passed on by
his enemies. Through their eyes, a portrait is drawn of
a vain and arrogant man who is weak and unyielding.
Historically, Julius Caesar was recorded to be an intelligent, witty, and charming man. An excellent orator and
a brilliant writer, Caesar brought about much needed
reforms in the Roman Senate, instituted the first public
library, improved the system of taxation, rebuilt cities,
and sought to have laws passed that would strengthen
the moral fabric of society. Shakespeare’s Caesar
reflects little of these redeeming qualities and remains
as human and ambiguous as the other characters in the
play. Indeed, Shakespeare seems to deliberately balance Caesar’s posturing with almost immediate confessions of weakness. For example, in lines 212–213,
Caesar proclaims “for always I am Caesar,” immediately
followed by the admission that he is partially deaf.
Caesar’s seizures, as recorded in Plutarch, and his
deafness, as invented by Shakespeare, serve a dramatic function as well as being indicators of Caesar’s
character. Caesar’s infirmities become symbolic of, or a
metaphor for, the diseases running rampant in Rome. In
Shakespeare’s time, the Elizabethans were very aware
of the existence of the body politic, a way of defining the
state in human terms. The leader is the head of the body
politic; the people represent the limbs. Just as Caesar’s
illnesses weaken his constitution, the state’s illnesses,
such as bipartisanism and civil disorder, weaken the
body politic.
Casca reveals to Brutus and Cassius the events that
took place off stage and caused such a show of concern from Caesar and his followers. According to the
cynical Casca, speaking in plain and straightforward
prose, Antony offered a crown of laurel leaves to Caesar, who, in a show of humility, refused it. The crowd so
cheered Caesar’s refusal of the crown that he had no
choice but to continue to refuse the laurel wreath on
three separate occasions. In Casca’s view, Caesar desperately wanted to accept the crown, and his refusal of
it was an act for the adoring crowd. Obviously, with his
red face as proof, Caesar was so angered by the
crowd’s reaction that he suffered an epileptic fit. The
common people’s love for Caesar grows to a fever pitch.
There is a need among the masses for a “Caesar,” and
for the time being, they are happy and content with this
one.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I, Scene 2

45

Casca expresses his
concern over the events
that have just transpired
and delivers the news that
Marullus and Flavius have
been put to death. Casca
agrees to meet with Cassius at a later time. Brutus
also takes his leave with a
promise to ponder further
the issues the men have
been discussing.
Left alone on stage, Cassius delivers the first soliloquy of the play. A soliloquy
is a dramatic device used
to allow a character the
opportunity to express the
real truth behind his
thoughts, feelings, and
actions. In this speech,
Cassius exposes both his Caesar refusing the crown offered him by Antony.
Machiavellian tendencies Mary Evans Picture Library
(unscrupulous and unprinCassius smugly revels in the fact that Brutus’ honorable
cipled means to achieve a dishonorable end) and his
“mettle” can, with fiery passion and praise, be changed,
delight in his own deviousness. In his continuing effort
just like heated metal could be forged into something
to play into Brutus’ vanity, Cassius reveals that he will
new. That Cassius must forge the letters reveals that the
forge several notes and throw them into Brutus’ window.
common people of Rome are content with Caesar as
These notes will proclaim the respect that Brutus comtheir leader and share none of the concerns of Cassius
mands in Rome and suggest that others are not satisfied
or the other members of the conspiracy.
with Caesar as absolute leader. Using a play on words,

46

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I, Scene 3

Act I,
Scene 3

One month passes. It is now the evening of the Ides of March and a storm
rages on Rome. Casca meets Cicero on the street and tells him of the
strange and eerie sights he has seen. Cassius arrives and Casca gives
him the news that the Senate means to crown Caesar king the following
day. Now with a heightened sense of urgency, Cassius knows he must
pull the forces of the conspiracy together immediately. Cassius enlists
Casca into the group of conspirators and makes his way to Brutus’ home.
Brutus must join the conspiracy if it is to be seen as a noble enterprise.

ACT I, SCENE 3.
Rome, a street.

NOTES

[Thunder and lightning. Enter, from opposite sides, CASCA
with his Sword drawn, and CICERO.]
Cicero Good even, Casca. Brought you Caesar home?
Why are you breathless? and why stare you so?

1.

Brought: escorted.

Casca Are you not moved when all the sway of earth
Shakes like a thing infirm? O Cicero,
I have seen tempests when the scolding winds
Have rived the knotty oaks, and I have seen
Th’ ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam
To be exalted with the threat’ning clouds;
But never till to-night, never till now,
Did I go through a tempest dropping fire.
Either there is a civil strife in heaven,
Or else the world, too saucy with the gods,
Incenses them to send destruction.

3.

sway: established order.

6.

rived: split in two.

5

10

10.

dropping fire: thunderbolts. In this and what follows, Shakespeare may be adapting Plutarch’s
suggestion that, before Caesar’s assassination,
“divers men were seen going up and down in the
fire.”

18.

Not sensible: unable to feel.

21.

glazed: a combination of glared and gazed.

22–23.

drawn . . . heap: huddled together.

Cicero Why, saw you anything more wonderful?
Casca A common slave (you know him well by sight)
Held up his left hand, which did flame and burn
Like twenty torches joined; and yet his hand,
Not sensible of fire, remained unscorched.
Besides (I ha’ not since put up my sword),
Against the Capitol I met a lion,
Who glazed upon me, and went surly by
Without annoying me. And there were drawn
Upon a heap a hundred ghastly women,
Transformed with their fear, who swore they saw
Men, all in fire, walk up and down the streets.

15

20

25

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I, Scene 3

And yesterday the bird of night did sit
Even at noonday upon the market place,
Hooting and shrieking. When these prodigies
Do so conjointly meet, let not men say
‘These are their reasons — they are natural,’
For I believe they are portentous things
Unto the climate that they point upon.
Cicero It is indeed a strange-disposed time
But men may construe things after their fashion,
Clean from the purpose of the things themselves.
Comes Caesar to the Capitol to-morrow?

26.

bird of night: the owl, also taken from Plutarch.

28.

prodigies: unnatural events.

32.

climate: country or region.

34.

construe: explain (with the accent on the first
syllable).

35.

clean . . . purpose: at variance with the real
meaning.

48.

unbraced: with doublet untied.

49.

thunder-stone: thunderbolt, lightning.

50.

cross: forked.

54.

part: natural action.

56.

astonish: to stun (originally, with a stone), to terrify.

30

35

Casca He doth; for he did bid Antonius
Send word to you he would be there to-morrow.
Cicero Good night then, Casca. This disturb’d sky
Is not to walk in.

47

40

Casca
Farewell, Cicero. [Exit CICERO.]
[Enter CASSIUS.]
Cassius. Who’s there?
Casca
Cassius

A Roman
Casca, by your voice.

Casca Your ear is good. Cassius, what night is this!
Cassius A very pleasing night to honest men.
Casca Who ever knew the heavens menace so?
Cassius Those that have known the earth so full
of faults.
For my part, I have walked about the streets,
Submitting me unto the perilous night,
And, thus unbraced, Casca, as you see,
Have bared my bosom to the thunder-stone;
And when the cross blue lightning seemed to open
The breast of heaven, I did present myself
Even in the aim and very flash of it.
Casca But wherefore did you so much tempt the
heavens?
It is the part of men to fear and tremble
When the most mighty gods by tokens send
Such dreadful heralds to astonish us.

45

50

55

48

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I, Scene 3

Cassius You are dull, Casca, and those sparks of
life
That should be in a Roman you do want,
Or else you use not. You look pale, and gaze,
And put on fear, and cast yourself in wonder,
To see the strange impatience of the heavens;
But if you would consider the true cause —
Why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts,
Why birds and beasts, from quality and kind;
Why old men, fools, and children calculate;
Why all these things change from their ordinance,
Their natures, and preformed faculties.
To monstrous quality — why you shall find
That heaven hath infused them with these spirits
To make them instruments of fear and warning
Unto some monstrous state.
Now could I, Casca, name to thee a man
Most like this dreadful night
That thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars
As doth the lion in the Capitol;
A man no mightier than thyself or me
In personal action, yet prodigious grown
And fearful, as these strange eruptions are.

60

65

60.

cast . . . wonder: throw yourself into a state of
wonder.

64.

from . . . kind: changed in their nature.

65.

calculate: make prophecies.

66.

ordinance: natural order.

67.

preformed: innate.

68.

monstrous: unnatural.

71.

Unto . . . state: of some terrible happening.

81.

thews: muscles.

82.

woe the while: alas for this age.

84.

yoke and sufferance: i.e., meek endurance of
tyranny.

88.

In . . . Italy: i.e., anywhere in the Roman Empire
except Italy itself (which would presumably still
be too powerfully republican to permit this).

89.

I . . . then: i.e., he will sheathe it in his own body.

91.

therein: i.e., in suicide.

95.

Can . . . to: can confine.

70

75

Casca ’Tis Caesar that you mean. Is it not, Cassius?
Cassius Let it be who it is. For Romans now
Have thews and limbs like to their ancestors;
But woe the while! our fathers’ minds are dead,
And we are governed with other mothers’ spirits;
Our yoke and sufferance show us womanish.
Casca Indeed, they say the senators to-morrow
Mean to establish Caesar as a king,
And he shall wear his crown by sea and land
In every place save here in Italy.
Cassius I know where I will wear this dagger then;
Cassius from bondage will deliver Cassius.
Therein, ye gods, you make the weak most strong;
Therein, ye gods, you tyrants do defeat.
Nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass,
Nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron,
Can be retentive to the strength of spirit;

80

85

90

95

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

But life, being weary of these worldly bars,
Never lacks power to dismiss itself.
If I know this, know all the world besides,
That part of tyranny that I do bear
I can shake off at pleasure. [Thunder still.]

Act I, Scene 3

Casca You speak to Casca, and to such a man
That is no fleering telltale. Hold, my hand.
Be factious for redress of all these griefs,
And I will set this foot of mine as far
As who goes farthest. [They shake hands.]
Cassius
There’s a bargain made.
Now know you, Casca, I have moved already
Some certain of the noblest-minded Romans
To undergo with me an enterprise
Of honourable dangerous consequence;
And I do know, by this, they stay for me
In Pompey’s Porch; for now, this fearful night,
There is no stir or walking in the streets,
And the complexion of the element
Is fev’rous, like the work we have in hand,
Most bloody, fiery, and most terrible.

98.

know . . . world: let all the world know.

101.

bondman: slave.

106.

hinds: deer, with an Elizabethan pun on servants.

109.

offal: waste.

110.

illuminate: give light to, in the sense of making
famous.

114.

My . . . made: i.e., I shall have to defend what I have
said.

115.

indifferent: a matter of indifference.

117.

fleering: the Elizabethan meaning combined our
fawning and sneering.

118.

redress: rectify a wrong.

100

Casca
So can I.
So every bondman in his own hand bears
The power to cancel his captivity.
Cassius And why should Caesar be a tyrant then?
Poor man! I know he would not be a wolf
But that he sees the Romans are but sheep;
He were no lion, were not Romans hinds.
Those that with haste will make a mighty fire
Behind it with weak straws. What trash is Rome,
What rubbish and what offal, when it serves
For the base matter to illuminate
So vile a thing as Caesar! But, O grief,
Where hast thou led me? I, perhaps, speak this
Before a willing bondman. Then I know
My answer must be made. But I am armed,
And dangers are to me indifferent.

105

110

115

factious: active.

120

125

125.

by this: i.e., because of the storm.

126.

Pompey’s Porch: the colonnade of the theater built
by Pompey.

128.

complexion . . . element: appearance of the sky.

129.

fev’rous: feverish.

131.

Stand close: stand back, conceal yourself.

130

[Enter CINNA.]
Casca Stand close awhile, for here comes one in
haste.

49

50

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I, Scene 3

Cassius ’Tis Cinna. I do know him by his gait.
He is a friend. Cinna, where haste you so?
Cinna To find out you. Who’s that? Metellus
Cimber?
Cinna No, it is Casca, one incorporate
To our attempts. Am I not stayed for, Cinna?

135

Cinna I am glad on’t. What a fearful night is this!
There’s two or three of us have seen strange sights.

135–6.

incorporate / To: part of.

137.

glad on’t: Cinna’s answer is to the news that
Casca is one of the conspirators. Cassius repeats
his question.

143.

praetor: magistrate; an office at this time held by
Brutus.

146.

old Brutus’ statue: see I.2.159.

150.

hie: hurry.

159.

His countenance: (1) his face, (2) his approval.

Cassius Am I not stayed for? Tell me.
Cinna
Yes, you are.
O Cassius, if you could
But win the noble Brutus to our party —

140

Cassius Be you content. Good Cinna, take this paper
And look you lay it in the praetor’s chair,
Where Brutus may but find it. And throw this
In at his window. Set this up with wax
Upon old Brutus’ statue. All this done,
Repair to Pompey’s Porch, where you shall find us.
Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?

145

Cinna All but Metellus Cimber, and he’s gone
To seek you at your house. Well, I will hie
And so bestow the papers as you bade me.

150

Cassius That done, repair to Pompey’s Theatre.
[Exit CINNA.]
Come, Casca, you and I will yet ere day
See Brutus at his house. Three parts of him
Is ours already, and the man entire
Upon the next encounter yields him ours.
Casca O, he sits high in all the people’s hearts;
And that which would appear offence in us,
His countenance, like richest alchemy,
Will change to virtue and to worthiness.
Cassius Him and his worth and our great need of
him
You have right well conceited. Let us go,
For it is after midnight; and ere day
We will awake him and be sure of him. [Exeunt.]

155

alchemy: the alchemists tried to change base
metals into gold. Whenever Shakespeare uses
the word it is associated with the failure, or falsity of this pseudo-science. Thus its effect in
Casca’s speech is unconsciously ironic. Although
Casca cannot know it yet, the addition of Brutus
does not change the conspirator’s plot “to virtue
and to worthiness.”

160

162.

well conceited: both correctly conceived and aptly
expressed.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act I, Scene 3

51

COMMENTARY

ne month has passed since the end of the last
scene. It is now the eve of the Ides of March, and
O
a storm, unlike any ever seen, is raging in Rome. Fire
drops from the skies, bodies spontaneously combust,
lions roam the capitol, ghostly women walk the streets,
and the night owl was seen shrieking in the daylight.
Casca enters with his sword drawn and his fright is
apparent as he encounters Cicero.
Second only to Caesar, Marcus Tullius Cicero, born
in 106 B.C., was the most important man in Rome. Highly
educated in Greece, Cicero became Rome’s most prominent lawyer and orator. Despite his excellent reputation
and acclaimed achievements, Cicero was feared by
Julius Caesar who made things so difficult for Cicero in
Rome that he was driven out of Italy in 59 B.C. Cicero
joined forces with Pompey, but when it became clear
that Pompey was going to be defeated, Cicero pleaded
for mercy from Caesar, and as was his habit, Caesar
pardoned Cicero. Cicero returned to Rome and to the
Senate, where he remained publicly neutral to Caesar’s
reforms of the government.
Unlike our modern theatres, with computerized special effects and state of the art sound systems, the Elizabethan theatre relied mainly on words to paint the
scenery and suggest the sounds of thunder and lightning. Elizabethan stagehands were not without a certain amount of clever inventiveness, however, and some
sound and lighting effects could be created. For example, beating drums or rolling large round bullets backstage often produced the sound of thunder. The effect
of lightning could be contrived by blowing rosin through
a candle flame to create a bright flash of fire.
Shakespeare, like many other writers, uses storms
to create a mood of darkness and foreboding, but here
he takes the image one step further. The turmoil of the
heavens is directly representative of the turmoil present in the state and in the minds of men. The raging
storm, coupled with the eerie sights that Casca
describes, are signs of disharmony in heaven and on
earth. Signs and omens, by their very nature, are meant
to be interpreted and the misinterpretation and manipulation of signs and omens become important thematic
issues in Julius Caesar. The ambiguities present in the
people and the events of this play are underscored as
Cicero points out to Casca, “men may construe things

after their fashion / Clean from the purpose of the things
themselves.” Casca, dismayed by the storm, suggests
that there is either civil strife in heaven or the gods are
angry at the deeds of men. He fears that the gods do not
approve of what the conspirators are planning to do and
feels that the omens bode only evil and misfortune. Cassius, on the other hand, feels that the storm and the
omens are signs that the gods are angry at Caesar’s
tyranny.
In the face of the irate heavens, Casca loses his use
of sarcastic prose and begins to speak in blank verse.
The imagery of the storm as Casca describes it in lines
3–11 is infused with metaphorical references to Caesar.
He speaks of the earth that “shakes like a thing infirm”
just as the epileptic Caesar shook when he had to
refuse the crown. Casca speaks of the “ambitious
ocean” that will “swell and rage and foam.” The picture
that he draws is reminiscent of an ambitious tyrant,
whose ego is swelled by his power, one who rages at
not getting his way and ends by foaming at the mouth in
an epileptic fit.
After Cassius admonishes Casca in particular and
Rome in general for being weak and “womanish,”
Casca makes the announcement that the Senate plans
to make Caesar king in the assembly the following day.
Historically, Caesar had called the senate into an emergency session set to meet on March 15. Caesar might
have instigated the session to have the Senate approve
a declaration of war against the Parthenians. However,
some historians speculate that he was to be made King
of the Provinces with the anticipation that, as the outlying cities of Italy accepted Caesar as King, the city of
Rome would quickly follow. If the conspirators intend to
stop Caesar before he is crowned, they must do it
tomorrow before the Senate has the opportunity to
convene.
Cassius is disgusted by what he interprets as the
apathy of the Roman people, whom he sees as mere
sheep that would blindly follow their leader into whatever dangers he might lead them. Metaphorically, Cassius sees the commoners as trash and rubbish.
Recalling the image of fire, they become the “base matter” or fuel that will “illuminate” or inflame the ego of
the “vile” Caesar.

52

Act I, Scene 3

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Between Cassius’ interpretation of the storm as the
gods raging against Caesar’s tyranny and the fact that
Caesar may be crowned king the following day, Casca
is persuaded to join forces with Cassius. Lucius Cornelius Cinna, whose father had been Caesar’s first
father-in-law, enters the scene, and the list of the conspirators grows to include Cinna, Decius Brutus, and
Gaius Trebonius. Both Decius Brutus and Trebonius
were considered to be close friends of Julius Caesar.
Caesar had appointed Trebonius chief magistrate of
Rome, an influential and honorable position. Caesar so
loved Decius Brutus that he had named him as one of
his heirs, if no other member of his family survived him.
All of these men who are now plotting to eliminate
Caesar were indebted to him for either pardoning them
as prisoners of war and/or placing them in high positions of honor. The meaning of friendship is an issue in
this play and here we see Caesar’s so-called friends plot
against him. They will use their position as Caesar’s
friends to get close enough to Caesar to kill him.
Cassius, having forged several letters meant to influence Brutus’ decision to join the conspiracy, instructs
Cinna to place the letters where Brutus will be sure to
find them. Cinna exits to leave the letters in Brutus’
office, to place one on the statue of Brutus’ ancestor
and throw others into Brutus’ window. Just as the conspirators plan to destroy their friend Caesar, they plot

Pompeii’s Theatre (or “Pompey’s porch,” as referred to by Cassius).
Michelle Jones/Ancient Art & Architecture Collection Ltd.

against their friend Brutus as well. Using dishonest
means to persuade Brutus to join in the group shows a
blatant disregard for the true meaning of friendship.
Brutus is not being wooed to join the conspiracy
because of a sense of brotherhood coming from these
other men. He is being used because the common people see him as “noble.” His presence in the conspiracy
will make the vile and immoral act of murder appear to
be an acceptable deed teeming with “virtue” and
“worthiness.”

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

CLIFFSCOMPLETE

JULIUS CAESAR

ACT II
Scene 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Scene 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
Scene 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Scene 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82

Portia O constancy, be strong upon my side,
Set a huge mountain ’tween my heart and tongue!
I have a man’s mind, but a woman’s might.
How hard it is for women to keep counsel!

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II,
Scene 1

Act II, Scene 1

57

Alone in his garden, Brutus contemplates the implications of joining
Cassius and the other conspirators. Based on the possibility of what
might happen if Caesar gains more power, Brutus agrees that Caesar
must die. The conspirators, along with Cassius, visit Brutus and the men
make their plans for the following day. After the men leave, Brutus’ wife
Portia asks to know what is troubling her husband. She has gashed her
leg in an effort to prove to Brutus that she is strong enough to endure
anything he may tell her. As he is preparing to tell her, there is a knock at
the door and Brutus promises Portia he will reveal all his secrets to her
as soon as possible.

ACT II, SCENE 1
Brutus’ orchard.

NOTES

[Enter BRUTUS.]
Brutus What, Lucius, ho!
I cannot by the progress of the stars
Give guess how near to day. Lucius I say!
I would it were my fault to sleep so soundly.
When, Lucius, when? Awake, I say! What, Lucius!

5

5.

When . . . when . . . What: exclamations of impatience.

7.

taper: candle.

[Enter LUCIUS.]
Lucius Called you, my lord?
Brutus Get me a taper in my study, Lucius.
When it is lighted, come and call me here.
Lucius I will, my lord. [Exit.]
Brutus It must be by his death; and for my part,
I know no personal cause to spurn at him,
But for the general. He would be crowned.
How that might change his nature, there the question.
It is the bright day that brings forth the adder,
And that craves wary walking. Crown him that
And then I grant we put a sting in him
That at his will he may do danger with.
Th’ abuse of greatness is, when it disjoins
Remorse from power. And to speak truth of Caesar
I have not known when his affections swayed
More than his reason. But ’tis common proof

10
11.

spurn: kick at/be scornful to.

12.

the general: general reasons in the interest of the
public good.

14–15.

It . . . walking: i.e., the sunshine brings out the adder
and makes careful walking necessary.

15.

Crown him that: Brutus hesitates at the distasteful
word king.

19.

Remorse: the word meant mercy or humanity in a
general sense to the Elizabethans.

20.

affections swayed: passions ruled.

21.

common proof: common experience.

15

20

58

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 1

That lowliness is young ambition’s ladder,
Whereto the climber upward turns his face;
But when lie once attains the upmost round,
He then unto the ladder turns his back,
Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees
By which he did ascend. So Caesar may.
Then lest he may, prevent. And since the quarrel
Will bear no colour for the thing he is,
Fashion it thus: that what he is, augmented,
Would run to these and these extremities;
And therefore think him as a serpent’s egg,
Which, hatched, would as his kind grow mischievous
And kill him in the shell.

22.

lowliness: false humility.

26.

base degrees: both (1) rungs of the ladder, and (2)
lower ranks.

29.

colour: excuse.

25

he: it.

30
30.

Fashion: shape, change the form of.

31.

extremities: extremes of power/tyranny

33.

his kind: his nature.

35.

closet: study.

44.

exhalations: meteors. Brutus recalls to the audience that the storm continues; it underlines the
tension throughout the scene. See commentary
at I.3.

51.

piece it out: fill it in.

[Enter LUCIUS.]
Lucius The taper burneth in your closet, sir.
Searching the window for a flint, I found
This paper, thus sealed tip; and I am sure
It did not lie there when I went to bed.

35

[Gives him a letter.]
Brutus Get you to bed again; it is not day.
Is not to-morrow, boy, the ides of March?

40

Lucius I know not, sir.
Brutus Look in the calendar and bring me word.
Lucius I will, sir.
Brutus These exhalations, whizzing in the air,
Gives so much light that I may read by them.
[Opens the letter and reads.]
‘Brutus, thou sleep’st. Awake and see thyself!
Shall Rome, &c. Speak, strike, redress!’
Brutus, thou sleep’st. Awake!
Such instigations have been often dropped
Where I have took them up.
‘Shall Rome, &c.’ Thus must I piece it out:
Shall Rome stand under one man’s awe? What, Rome?
My ancestors did from the streets of Rome
The Tarquin drive when he was called a king.
‘Speak, strike, redress!’ Am I entreated

45

50

55

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 1

To speak and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise,
If the redress will follow, thou receivest
Thy full petition at the hand of Brutus.

58.

thy full petition: all you ask.

S.D.

within: i.e., offstage.

61.

whet: sharpened like a knife.

65.

phantasma: horrible illusion.

66.

genius . . . instruments: spirit and faculties.

72.

moe: more.

76.

favour: feature.

[Enter LUCIUS.]
Lucius Sir, March is wasted fifteen days.
[Knock within.]
Brutus ’Tis good. Go to the gate; somebody knocks.
[Exit LUCIUS.]
Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar,
I have not slept.
Between the acting of a dreadful thing
And the first motion, all the interim is
Like a phantasma or a hideous dream.
The genius and the mortal instruments
Are then in council, and the state of man,
Like to a little kingdom, suffers then
The nature of an insurrection.

60

65

[Enter LUCIUS.]
Lucius Sir, ’tis your brother Cassius at the door,
Who doth desire to see you.
Brutus

70

Is he alone?

Lucius No, sir. There are moe with him.
Brutus

Do you know them?

Lucius No, Sir. Their hats are plucked about
their ears
And half their faces buried in their cloaks,
That by no means I may discover them
By any mark of favour.
Brutus
Let ’em enter. [Exit LUCIUS.]
They are the faction. O conspiracy,
Sham’st thou to show thy dangerous brow by night,
When evils are most free? O, then by day
Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
To mask thy monstrous visage? Seek none,
conspiracy.

75

80

59

60

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 1

Hide it in smiles and affability:
For if thou put thy native semblance on,
Not Erebus itself were dim enough
To hide thee from prevention.

85

[Enter the conspirators, CASSIUS, CASCA, DECIUS,
CINNA, METELLUS CIMBER, and TREBONIUS.]

83.

native semblance: natural appearance. Some editors read “path” (walk) for “put” in this line.

84.

Erebus: in classical mythology, a region of darkness between Earth and Hades.

85.

prevention: being forestalled.

98.

watchful cares: cares that keep one awake.

107.

growing on: toward.

Cassius I think we are too bold upon your rest.
Good morrow, Brutus. Do we trouble you?
Brutus I have been up this hour, awake all night.
Know I these men that come along with you?
Cassius Yes, every man of them; and no man here
But honours you; and every one doth wish
You had but that opinion of yourself
Which every noble Roman bears of you.
This is Trebonius.
Brutus

He is welcome hither.

Cassius This, Decius Brutus.
Brutus

90

95

He is welcome too.

Cassius This, Casca; this, Cinna; and this Metellus
Cimber.
Brutus They are all welcome.
What watchful cares do interpose themselves
Betwixt your eyes and night?
Cassius Shall I entreat a word? [They whisper.]

100

Decius Here lies the east. Doth not the day break
here?
Casca No.
Cinna O, pardon sir, it doth; and yon grey lines
That fret the clouds are messengers of day.
Casca You shall confess that you are both deceived.
Here, as I point my sword, the sun arises,
Which is a great way growing on the south,
Weighing the youthful season of the year.
Some two months hence, up higher toward the north
He first presents his fire; and the high east

105

110

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 1

61

Stands as the Capitol, directly here.
Brutus Give me your hands all over, one by one.
Cassius And let us swear our resolution.
Brutus No, not an oath. If not the face of men,
The sufference of our souls, the time’s abuse —
If these be motives weak, break off betimes,
And every man hence to his idle bed.
So let high-sighted tyranny rage on
Till each man drop by lottery. But if these
(As I am sure they do) bear fire enough
To kindle cowards and to steel with valour
The melting spirits of women, then, countrymen,
What need we any spur but our own cause
To prick us to redress? what other bond
Than secret Romans that have spoke the word
And will not palter? and what other oath
Than honesty to honesty engaged
That this shall be, or we will fall for it?
Swear priests and cowards and men cautelous,
Old feeble carrions and such suffering souls
That welcome wrongs; unto bad causes swear
Such creatures as men doubt; but do not stain
The even virtue of our enterprise,
Nor th’ insuppressive mettle of our spirits,
To think that or our cause or our performance
Did need an oath; when every drop of blood
That every Roman bears, and nobly bears,
Is guilty of a several bastardy
If he do break the smallest particle
Of any promise that hath passed from him.

114–6.

“if the misery in men’s faces, the suffering in their
souls, the evils of the time are not strong enough
motives.” (J. H. Walter)

116.

betimes: at once.

118.

high-sighted: ambitious.

119.

by lottery: by chance.

115

120

if these: i.e., these motives.

124.

prick: spur.

126.

palter: quibble or deceive.

129.

cautelous: crafty.

130.

carrions: living carcasses.

134.

insuppressive: unsuppressable; indomitable.

138.

several bastardy: i.e., a separate act, showing it not
to be true Roman blood.

145.

opinion: reputation.

125

130

135

140

Cassius But what of Cicero? Shall we sound him?
I think he will stand very strong with us.
Casca Let us not leave him out.
Cinna

No, by no means.

Metellus O, let us have him! for his silver hairs
Will purchase us a good opinion
And buy men’s voices to commend our deeds.

145

62

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 1

It shall be said his judgment ruled our hands.
Our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,
But all be buried in his gravity.
Brutus O, name him not! Let us not break with
him;
For he will never follow anything
That other men begin.
Cassius

150

148.

no whit: none at all.

149.

gravity: authority.

150.

break with: break our news to, discuss.

158.

means: powers.

164.

envy: malice.

175–7.

And . . . ‘em: i.e., let our hearts excite our hands
to an act of violence, and afterwards rebuke
them.

178.

envious: malicious.

180.

purgers: healers who heal by letting blood.

Then leave him out.

Casca Indeed he is not fit.
Decius Shall no man else be touched but only
Caesar?
Cassius Decius, well urged. I think it is not meet
Mark Antony, so well beloved of Caesar,
Should outlive Caesar. We shall find of him
A shrewd contriver; and you know, his means,
If he improve them, may well stretch so far
As to annoy us all; which, to prevent,
Let Antony and Caesar fall together.
Brutus Our course will seem too bloody, Caius
Cassius,
To cut the head off and then hack the limbs,
Like wrath in death and envy afterwards;
For Antony is but a limb of Caesar.
Let’s be sacrificers, but not butchers, Caius.
We all stand up against the spirit of Caesar,
And in the spirit of men there is no blood.
O that we then could come by Caesar’s spirit
And not dismember Caesar! But, alas,
Caesar must bleed for it! And, gentle friends,
Let’s kill him boldly, but not wrathfully;
Let’s carve him as a dish fit for the gods,
Not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds.
And let our hearts, as subtle masters do,
Stir up their servants to an act of rage
And after seem to chide ’em. This shall make
Our purpose necessary, and not envious;
Which so appearing to the common eyes,
We shall be called purgers, not murderers.

155

160

165

170

175

180

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 1

63

And for Mark Antony, think not of him;
For he can do no more than Caesar’s arm
When Caesar’s head is off.
Cassius
Yet I fear him;
For in the ingrafted love he bears to Caesar —
Brutus Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him!
If he love Caesar, all that he can do
Is to himself — take thought, and die for Caesar.
And that were much he should; for he is given
To sports, to wildness, and much company.
Trebonius There is no fear in him. Let him not die;
For he will live, and laugh at this hereafter.

184.

ingrafted: deep-rooted.

188.

And . . . should: i.e., that is too much to expect of
him.

190.

no fear: nothing to fear.

196.

from the main: as opposed to the strong.

197.

ceremonies: portents, omens.

198.

apparent prodigies: wonders that have appeared.

200.

augurers: priests who interpreted omens.

204.

betrayed with trees: i.e., tricked into running their
horns into trees, and thus easily captured.

205.

glasses: mirrors, in which they think they see other
bears.

185

190

[Clock strikes.]
Brutus Peace! Count the clock.
Cassius

The clock hath stricken three.

Trebonius ’Tis time to part.
Cassius
But it is doubtful yet
Whether Caesar will come forth to-day or no;
For he is superstitious grown of late,
Quite from the main opinion he held once
Of fantasy, of dreams, and ceremonies.
It may be these apparent prodigies,
The unaccustomed terror of this night,
And the persuasion of his augurers
May hold him from the Capitol to-day.
Decius Never fear that. If he be so resolved,
I can o’ersway him; for he loves to hear
That unicorns may be betrayed with trees
And bears with glasses, elephants with holes,
Lions with toils, and men with flatterers;
But when I tell him he hates flatterers,
He says he does, being then most flattered.
Let me work;
For I can give his humour the true bent
And I will bring him to the Capitol.
Cassius Nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.

195

200

205

holes: pits as traps.
206.

toils: snares.
flatterers: i.e., flatterers are to men as the various
snares are to animals.

210

210.

humour bent: i.e., I can guide his mood.

212.

fetch: escort.

64

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene1

213.

uttermost: latest.

215.

bear Caesar hard: bear a grudge against Caesar.

216.

rated: upbraided.

218.

by him: to his house.

220

220.

fashion: shape (to our purpose).

225

225.

put on: reveal.

227.

formal constancy: steadfast self-possession.

230.

honey-heavy due: sweet dreams.

231.

figures: i.e., the mind; fantasies.

235.

commit: expose.

236.

condition: constitution.

237.

ungently: discourteously.

240.

across: folded across your chest, held by the Elizabethans to be a sign of melancholy.

Brutus By the eighth hour. Is that the uttermost?
Cinna Be that the uttermost, and fail not then.
Metellus Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesar hard,
Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey.
I wonder none of you have thought of him.
Brutus Now, good Metellius, go along by him.
He loves me well, and I have given him reasons
Send him but hither, and I’ll fashion him.

215

Cassius The morning comes upon ’s. We’ll leave
you, Brutus.
And, friends, disperse yourselves; but all remember
What we have said and show yourselves true Romans.
Brutus Good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily.
Let not our looks put on our purposes,
But bear it as our Roman actors do,
With untired spirits and formal constancy.
And so good morrow to you every one.
[Exeunt all except BRUTUS.]
Boy! Lucius! Fast asleep? It is no matter.
Enjoy the honey-heavy due of slumber.
Thou has no figures nor no fantasies
Which busy care draws in the brains of men;
Therefore thou sleep’st so sound.

230

[Enter PORTIA.]
Portia

Brutus, my lord.

Brutus Portia! What mean you? Wherefore rise
you now?
It is not for your health thus to commit
Your weak condition to the raw cold morning.
Portia Nor for yours neither. Y’ have ungently,
Brutus,
Stole from my bed. And yesternight at supper
You suddenly arose and walked about,
Musing and sighing with your arms across:
And when I asked you what the matter was,
You stared upon me with ungentle looks.
I urged you further; then you scratched your head

235

240

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

And too impatiently stamped with your foot.
Yet I insisted; yet you answered not,
But with an angry wafter of your hand
Gave sign for me to leave you. So I did,
Fearing to strengthen that impatience
Which seemed too much enkindled, and withal
Hoping it was but an effect of humor,
Which sometime hath his hour with every man.
It will not let you cat nor talk nor sleep,
And could it work so much upon your shape
As it hath much prevailed on your condition,
I should not know you Brutus. Dear my lord,
Make me acquainted with your cause of grief.

Act II, Scene 1

65

245

250

246.

wafter: wave.

250.

humor: mood; here, ill-humor.

253.

shape: physical appearance.

254.

condition: state of mind.

261.

physical: healthy.

262.

unbraced: with the doublet open.

255

Brutus I am not well in health, and that is all.
Portia Brutus is wise and, were he not in health,
He would embrace the means to come by it.
Brutus Why so I do. Good Portia, go to bed.
Portia Is Brutus sick, and is it physical
To walk unbraced and suck up the humours
Of the dank morning? What, is Brutus sick,
And will he steal out of his wholesome bed
To dare the vile contagion of the night,
And tempt the rheumy and unpurged air,
To add unto his sickness? No, my Brutus.
You have some sick offence within your mind,
Which by the right and virtue of my place
I ought to know of; and upon my knees
I charm you, by my once commended beauty,
By all your vows of love; and that great vow
Which did incorporate and make us one,
That you unfold to me, your self, your half,
Why you are heavy — and what men to-night
Have had resort to you; for here have been
Some six or seven, who did hide their faces
Even from darkness.
Brutus

Kneel not, gentle Portia.

Portia I should not need if you were gentle Brutus.

260

humours: mists.
265

265.

To . . . night: Night air was thought to be unhealthy.
There is also a reference here, although Portia does
not know it, to the night, or darkness, of conspiracy.

266.

rheumy: moist.
unpurged: not yet purified by the sun.

270

275

268.

sick offence: harmful illness.

271.

charm: means both (1) persuade and (2) charm with
her beauty.

273.

incorporate: join together.

274.

half: i.e., other half.

66

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 1

Within the bond of marriage, tell me, Brutus,
It is excepted I should know no secrets
That appertain to you? Am I your self
But, as it were, in sort or limitation?
To keep with you at meals, comfort your bed,
And talk to you sometimes? Dwell I but in the
suburbs
Of your good pleasure? If it be no more,
Portia is Brutus’ harlot, not his wife.
Brutus You are my true and honourable wife,
As dear to me as are the ruddy drops
That visit my sad heart.
Portia If this were true, then should I know this
secret.
I grant I am a woman; but withal
A woman that Lord Brutus took to wife.
I grant I am a woman; but withal
A woman well-reputed, Cato’s daughter.
Think you I am no stronger than my sex,
Being so fathered and so husbanded?
Tell me your counsels; I will not disclose ’em.
I have made strong proof of my constancy,
Giving myself a voluntary wound
Here, in the thigh. Can I bear that with patience,
And not my husband’s secrets?

280

280–3.

bond, excepted, sort or limitation: these are all
Elizabethan legal terms. The meaning is, is it part
of the marriage contract that I should not know
your secrets? Am I only a limited part of you?

285

285.

suburbs: London suburbs, notorious for prostitution. This idea introduces “harlot” in Iine 287.

298.

counsels: secret plans.

299.

proof of constancy: test of endurance.

307.

engagements: commitments.

308.

charactery: what is written upon, i.e., the
meaning.

290

295

300

Brutus
O ye gods,
Render me worthy of this noble wife!
[Knocking within.]
Hark! hark! One knocks. Portia, go in awhile,
And by and by thy bosom shall partake
The secrets of my heart.
All my engagements I will construe thee,
And all the charactery of my sad brows.
Leave me with haste. [Exit PORTIA.]
Lucius, who’s that knocks?

305

[Enter LUCIUS and CAIUS LIGARIUS.]
Lucius Here is a sick man that would speak with
you.

310

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 1

Brutus Caius Ligarius, that Metellus spake of.
Boy stand aside. Caius Ligarius, how?

67

312.

how?: exclamation of surprise.

315.

wear a kerchief: i.e., wear some sort of bandage,
be ill.

322.

derived . . . loins: of honorable descent.

323.

exorcist: one who frees others from evil spirits.

324.

mortified: as though dead.

327.

whole: well. Brutus extends Ligarius’ idea of recovery from sickness to the conspiracy.

328.

make sick: euphemisim for kill.

331.

to whom: i.e., and to whom.

Caius Vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.
Brutus O, what a time have you chose out, brave
Caius,
To wear a kerchief! Would you were not sick!

315

Caius I am not sick if Brutus have in hand
Any exploit worthy the name of honour.
Brutus Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius,
Had you a healthful ear to hear of it.
Cassius By all the gods that Romans bow before,
I here discard my sickness. [Throws off his kerchief.]
Soul of Rome,
Brave son derived from honourable loins,
Thou like an exorcist hast conjured up
My mortified spirit. Now bid me run,
And I will strive with things impossible;
Yea, get the better of them. What’s to do?

320

325

Brutus A piece of work that will make sick men
whole.
Caius But are not some whole that we must make
sick?
Brutus That must we also. What it is, my Caius,
I shall unfold to thee as we are going,
To whom it must be done.
Caius
Set on your foot,
And with a heart new-fired I follow you,
To do I know not what; but it sufficeth
That Brutus leads me on. [Thunder.]
Brutus Follow me then. [Exeunt.]

330

335

68

Act II, Scene 1

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

COMMENTARY

S

cholars speculate that Hamlet was written immediately after Shakespeare finished Julius Caesar. If
that is the case, it would seem quite likely that the soulsearching Brutus became the prototype for the character of Hamlet. Just as Hamlet endlessly questions and
analyzes his actions, Brutus, in Act II, Scene 1, contemplates the ramifications of joining the conspiracy
against Julius Caesar.
Scene 1 takes place in Brutus’ garden, usually a
place of quiet tranquility where a man may commune
with nature. Tonight, however, a storm has raged in
Rome and Brutus’ private domain is, like the rest of
nature, in terrible turmoil. As in the previous scene, the
unnatural disharmony of the universe is symbolic of the
dissonance of the state and representative of the discord in Brutus’ soul. There is such chaos in the cosmos
that even time is out of joint: “I cannot by the progress
of the stars / Give guess how near to day.”
Brutus is not only unable to determine the time of
day; he also has trouble remembering what day of the
month it is. In the 1623 Folio version of the play, line 40
reads, “Is not tomorrow the first of March?” Many editors change the line to read “the Ides of March” but it
is possible that both Shakespeare and his audience
would have understood Brutus’ confusion about time.
On one level, Brutus’ inability to determine the time and
date would suggest that he is equally unable to understand the times in which he is living. The people of Rome
are happy and content with their leader and Brutus, like
Cassius in the previous scene, will refuse to see that.
His confusion with time could also be a direct reference
to a major political issue occurring in England and
throughout Europe at the time Julius Caesar was written.
Julius Caesar is credited with creating the Julian
calendar and Plutarch suggests that many of Caesar’s
detractors cited the new calendar as evidence against
him. They claimed his implementation of the calendar
was proof of his tyrannical tendencies and that his
manipulation of time was an interference with the true
course of nature. By the year 1582, the Julian calendar
had drifted ten days out of phase and Pope Gregory
decreed the reform of the existing calendar. The
Catholic followers of the Pope adopted the new calen-

dar whereas the Protestants rejected it. The issue of
calendar reform became an intense political struggle in
Europe. By 1598, the year before Shakespeare is
thought to have written Julius Caesar, there were five
weeks separating the celebrations of the Catholic
Easter and the Protestant Easter. Many of the English
Protestants, like the Romans before them, felt that being
forced by Queen Elizabeth to maintain the Julian calendar was tyrannical and an interference with the true
course of nature.
Brutus’ envy of his servant Lucius’ ability to sleep
soundly suggests that his mind has been recently troubled and it is worry over Caesar’s power that prevents
him from finding rest. In referring to the lean and hungry Cassius in the previous act, Caesar intimates that
men who cannot sleep at night are dangerous and now
the sleepless Brutus will indeed become a danger to
Julius Caesar. In his nocturnal ruminations, Brutus has
begun to convince himself that Caesar must die.
Brutus’ interior debate and the ensuing verdict that
Caesar must be assassinated illustrates some of the
major flaws in Brutus’ character. He sees himself as a
noble man with a strong sense of morality and works
hard to maintain that image with the public. In this soliloquy, however, the audience sees a man who can convince himself that murder is an appropriate answer
based solely on conjecture. Brutus merely speculates
that Caesar may become too powerful and in anticipation of what that power may do, he makes his decision
to support the actions of the conspiracy. History consistently demonstrates that power can corrupt, but if the
populace decided to eliminate all politicians based on
the possibility that they may become power-hungry,
there would be no leaders left. Brutus’ decision to join
in the plot to murder Caesar is based on fallacious logic
and shows him as a man who considers his knowledge
of human nature so great that he is capable of seeing
into the future. By assuming to play god, he can prevent
what he, in his own infinite wisdom, sees as harmful to
Rome. In this light, is Brutus any different than Caesar?
Caesar, based on his reforms in Italy, is judged harshly
for wanting Rome to conform to his worldview and here
Brutus behaves just like the man he will kill. In doing so,
he forces the world to conform to his personal vision of
it. Brutus is so concerned with his sense of self that he

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar
does not recognize his irrational logic and inability to
reason; this fault will undermine the conspiracy and create havoc in the Rome he professes to love so dearly.
In addition to Brutus’ skewed logic, his susceptible
vanity and inordinate pride are also highlighted in this
scene. Lucius, finding one of the forged letters that has
been thrown into Brutus’ window, brings the note to Brutus who fails to recognize it as a forgery. Instead, he
views the note as a public affirmation of his recent decision to eliminate Caesar. His pride at being an ancestor
of the man who vanquished the Tarquin King spurs him
to fill in the blanks of the forged note with his own version of what the people want. He himself will vanquish a
King and take his place among the great heroes of Rome.
Brutus is completely aware of the hideous quality of
the conspiracy as he personifies it as a monster in lines
78–85. He may delude himself when searching his soul
for the motives for killing Caesar, but he knows without
a doubt that the act is an evil thing that should be hidden away. Brutus is nothing if not a consummate politician and he is cognizant of the fact that it is often
necessary in politics to mask a monster with “smiles
and affability.”
Shakespeare’s reference to Erebus in this passage
is packed with meaning and is an interesting segue into
the next section of the text. According to Greek mythology, Erebus, the dark underground passage to Hell, was
born of Chaos. Chaos was the primordial void that
existed before order was created in the universe and
from which all things, including the gods, proceeded.
Immediately following the reference, Cassius and the
other conspirators emerge from the dark, chaotic night
and take their places in the dark and chaotic history of
Rome that will follow the death of Caesar.
Cassius, always a man focused on his mission,
greets Brutus with words of flattery and the two men
move to one side, conversing in whispers while the
other conspirators take center stage. In this portion of
the scene, Shakespeare again depicts the inability of
men to tell the time of day. Not only does the writer draw
attention to the incompetence of these men to judge the
times they live in but he also shows them as an unorganized and contradictory group who cannot agree on
where the sun rises, much less on issues of vast political importance.

Act II, Scene 1

69

Brutus, as the newest official member of the conspiracy, begins his association with this group of bumbling and confused men with a few blunders of his own.
Cassius suggests that the conspirators swear an oath,
which Brutus quickly vetoes. Although Brutus knows
murder is a dishonorable act, he must find a way to
“fashion” it into something noble and virtuous and to
swear an oath, would give the conspiracy an appearance of secrecy and exclusivity. An oath would also
give way to the possibilities of lies and betrayals of that
oath, and “appearance,” important to a politician, is vital
to Brutus’ personal sense of honor to give this endeavor
the look of honesty and lofty ideals.
The next issue to be broached is the possible addition of Cicero to the list of conspirators. As revealed earlier, Cicero was an excellent and coercive speaker. He
knew the law and, as seen in contrast to Casca in the
storm scene, Cicero is calm and collected under pressure. He would be an invaluable addition to the conspiracy but again, Brutus says no. This time he cites the
excuse that Cicero “will never follow anything / That
other men begin.” Brutus is intimidated by Cicero’s tendency to be a leader rather than a follower. If Cicero
took the lead in this enterprise, who would then be
noted by history as the man who freed Rome from its
tyrant king? Cassius, in his effort to keep Brutus content
and part of the conspiracy, concedes to him again.
Decius then asks if anyone other than Caesar should
“be touched.” Cassius quickly responds that it would
benefit their plans if “Antony and Caesar fall together.”
Where Brutus is a political idealist, Cassius is a political realist. Cassius understands the workings of human
nature and is a much better judge of character than
Brutus. He knows that Antony is not only a loyal friend
to Caesar but also a fine soldier and would be in a solid
position to mount an attack against the conspiracy. Brutus, on the other hand, sees only Antony’s weaknesses:
“he is given / To sports, to wildness, and much company.” Shakespeare, again using the image of the body
politic, has Brutus compare Antony to merely a limb of
the body that will wither and die when the head, Caesar, is severed. In underestimating Antony’s strengths,
Brutus continues on the course that will doom the conspiracy to failure.
Brutus’ reticence to kill Antony along with Caesar is
at first glance a noble one, but a closer look at his

70

Act II, Scene 1

motives reveals a clever politician attempting to do a little spin-doctoring. Just as Caesar attempted at the
beginning of the play to make the Feast of the Lupercal,
a religious ceremony, into a political one, Brutus now
desires to make a political act into something religious.
If Brutus can succeed at making an act of cold-blooded
murder done to advance the personal ambitions of a
small group of men into something that is perceived as
sacred, he will have achieved two things. Personally, he
will be able to relieve his own conscience by rationalizing an immoral act as something moral. In addition, if
the act appears as a religious sacrifice, the “common
eyes” of the people of Rome will believe that what the
conspirators have done was “necessary, and not envious.” Brutus, like every good politician, is concerned
with how his actions are interpreted by the general populace and seeks to manipulate situations to win their
approval.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar
Up until this point in the play, only the public Brutus
has been seen. With the entrance of his wife, Portia, the
reader has the opportunity to witness the private Brutus. He is a very different man within the confines of his
own home. He is gentle with his servant, Lucius, and
seems genuinely worried about Portia when she enters
the scene, expressing concern that she is exposing herself to the “raw cold morning.” Portia paints a portrait
of what her husband has recently become and by doing
so illustrates for the audience what the private Brutus
was before becoming involved in the plot against Caesar. Brutus shows evidence of being a man who has the
capacity to feel deeply about people and their situations
but unfortunately chooses to deny those feelings in public in an effort to maintain his honorable and stoic image.

As the final plans are drawn for Caesar’s assassination, the clock strikes three. In the majority of editions
of Julius Caesar, the striking clock is often identified as
an anachronism. There were no mechanical clocks in
the Rome of Julius Caesar, but, as opposed to being a
mistake by the writer, the striking clock could serve as
another reminder that the time or the times they are living in are out of sync. Also, the fact that Brutus asks the
conspirators to “Count the clock” may be Shakespeare’s way of underscoring the number three as a
number identified with betrayal. The majority of Elizabethans watching the play would perhaps associate the
number three with the number of times that Peter
betrayed Jesus and also with the time, according to the
Bible, that Jesus died upon the cross.

Portia was Brutus’ first cousin as well as his second
wife. At the time the play takes place, they had been
married for about two years. She was the daughter of
Marcus Porcuis Cato or “Cato the Younger,” a leader in
Pompey’s army who fought against Caesar in Africa.
Known for his steadfast virtue and adherence to his
principles, Cato committed suicide rather than surrender to Caesar’s army. Portia herself is a strong woman,
proud of her lineage, and not afraid to confront her husband or take a stand for equality in her marriage. She
confronts Brutus, demanding to know why he is so troubled, and she does not allow him to cover his activities
with evasive stories about ill health. Appealing to Brutus’ own sense of honor, she questions if he is dishonoring her by not sharing his secrets with her. Brutus, in
one of his most sincere and heartfelt responses, replies
that she is his “true and honourable wife, / As dear to
me as are the ruddy drops / That visit my sad heart.”

The men prepare to leave and Cassius expresses his
concern that, because Caesar has recently become
superstitious, he might choose not go to the Capitol.
Decius assures the others that he will be able to convince Caesar to go to the Capitol no matter what mood
he may be in and volunteers to escort him to the Capitol himself. Cassius insists that everyone should meet
Caesar and they all should accompany him to the Capitol. The plot is set, the hour agreed upon and Brutus bids
farewell to the conspirators with an admonishment to
conceal their purpose and, like actors, put on the mask
of normalcy.

Portia reminds Brutus of her heritage and by association hopes to convince Brutus that she is stronger than
the majority of wives. To prove her fearlessness, constancy, and equality, she shows Brutus the wound she
has made on her thigh. According to Plutarch, Portia
gashed herself with a razor. The gash became infected
and she was quite ill, running a very high fever. It might
possibly be this fever to which Brutus refers in the early
part of the scene when he comments on his wife’s weak
health. The ability to suffer silently was highly prized as
a Roman virtue and, by wounding herself, Portia seeks
to prove herself constant and worthy of Brutus’ trust.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar
Her husband is convinced of Portia’s trustworthiness
and promises to tell her everything as soon as possible.
The image of illness and the theme of disease runs
continuously through Julius Caesar. Caesar’s deafness,
his epilepsy, and his possible inability to produce children are revealed early in Act I. Before Cassius and the
other conspirators enter the scene in Act II, Brutus
comments on the disease that occurs between the conception of an idea and the action that completes it. He
speaks of the “genius” or soul of man being at war with
his body or “mortal instruments.” As the soul or spiritual nature of man battles with his mortal or base
desires, the state of humanity or the body politic suffers
and becomes ill. Shakespeare often compares the illness and discord in mankind to the dissonance rampant
in the universe.
The scene between Brutus and Portia incorporates
illness both real and speculative, and the entrance of
Caius Ligarius is blatant with the images of sickness in
man and in the body politic. Due to his illness, Ligarius,
a senator who had originally supported Pompey but had,
like the other conspirators, been pardoned by Caesar,
comes late to the meeting. He tells Brutus that his illness will be cured if Brutus is involved in an “exploit
worthy the name of honor.” According to Brutus, this
honorable exploit is, “A piece of work that will make
sick men whole.” Caius replies, “But are not some
whole that we must make sick?” Disease is running

Act II, Scene 1

71

rampant through both individuals and Rome. Caesar, the
head of Rome, is suffering from overly ambitious desires
for power. His illness has infected the rest of the body,
or the people of Rome. Brutus cannot sleep at night and
his wife fears he is ill. Portia is running a high fever from
the wound she has inflicted on herself. Ligarius’ health
affects the conspiracy. There is no choice but to find a
cure for the illness before it kills the entire body. Unfortunately, Brutus and Cassius do not effect a cure.
Rather, they choose to cut off the head of the body (Caesar) in an effort to heal the body as a whole, but a body
cannot live without a head, and Rome will not be cured
of its ills in this way either. The body, either human or
politic, must have a head. Without it, the body dies.
Brutus and Cassius have made plans to cut out the
disease they have diagnosed as fatal to Rome, but their
scheme seems to stop there. No discussion has ensued
concerning what will happen after Caesar is dead. Who
will rule Rome? Will this new regime govern the people
in new ways? The conspirators are lethally shortsighted and their lack of a plan of action spells disaster
for their cause, whatever that may be.
Caius Ligarius, in the final few lines of this scene,
calls Brutus the “Soul of Rome.” If Brutus is indeed a
shining example of the conscience and spiritual nature
of Rome, it is no wonder that chaos and disorder are tormenting the capitol of Italy.

72

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 2

Act II,
Scene 2

Caesar’s wife, Calpurnia, is concerned by the violent storm and the odd
sightings reported throughout Rome. She has also had a dream that she
fears is a warning of Caesar’s death. She begs Caesar to stay home and
he finally agrees. When Decius Brutus arrives to escort Caesar to the
Senate, Caesar tells him he is not going. He tells Decius of Calpurnia’s
dream but Decius reinterprets the dream, making it an omen of good
fortune. Caesar chooses to believe Decius and when the other Senators
arrive, he leaves with them to go to the Capitol.

ACT II, SCENE 2
Caesar’s house.

NOTES

[Thunder and lightning. Enter JULIUS CAESAR, in his
nightgown.]

S.D.

Caesar Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace
to-night.
Thrice hath Calpurnia in her sleep cried out
‘Help ho! They murder Caesar!’ Who’s within?

nightgown: dressing. gown.

1.

This is heavily ironic; Caesar’s “peace” is threatened by another kind of storm.

3.

Who’s within: i.e., which of the servants.

5.

priests: who conduct the auguries.

[Enter a Servant.]
Servant My lord?
Caesar Go bid the priests do present sacrifice,
And bring me their opinions of success.

5

present: immediate.

Servant I will, my lord. [Exit.]
[Enter CALPURNIA.]
Calpurnia What mean you Caesar? Think you to
walk forth?
You shall not stir out of your house to-day.
Caesar Caesar shall forth. The things that threatened me
Ne’er looked but on my back. When they shall see
The face of Caesar, they are vanished.
Calpurnia Caesar, I never stood on ceremonies,
Yet now they fright me. There is one within,
Besides the things that we have heard and seen,
Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch.

10

13.

stood on ceremonies: considered portents of any
significance.

16.

watch: watchmen.

15

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

A lioness hath whelped in the streets,
And graves have yawned and yielded up their dead.
Fierce fiery warriors fought upon the clouds
In ranks and squadrons and right form of war,
Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol.
The noise of battle hurtled in the air,
Horses did neigh, and dying men did groan,
And ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets.
O Caesar, these things are beyond all use,
And I do fear them!

Act II, Scene 2

20

25

Caesar
What can be avoided
Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods?
Yet Caesar shall go forth; for these predictions
Are to the world in general as to Caesar.
Calpurnia When beggars die there are no comets
seen;
The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of
princes.
Caesar Cowards die many times before their
deaths;
The valiant never taste of death but once.
Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,
It seems to me most strange that men should fear,
Seeing that death, a necessary end,
Will come when it will come.

17.

whelped: given birth

20.

right form: battle order.

22.

hurtled: clashed with violence and noise.

25.

use: any usual experience or custom.

29.

Are to: apply as much to.

31.

blaze forth: proclaim

41.

in shame of: i.e., to shame the coward.

42.

Caesar should be: i.e., would himself be.

46.

littered: born.

30

35

[Enter a Servant.]
What say the augurers?
Servant They would not have you to stir forth
to-day.
Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,
They could not find a heart within the beast.
Caesar The gods do this in shame of cowardice.
Caesar should be a beast without a heart
If he should stay at home to-day for fear.
No, Caesar shall not. Danger knows full well
That Caesar is more dangerous than he.
We are two lions littered in one day,

40

45

73

74

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 2

And I the elder and more terrible,
And Caesar shall go forth.
Calpurnia
Alas, my lord,
Your wisdom is consumed in confidence.
Do not go forth to-day. Call it my fear
That keeps you in the house and not your own.
We’ll send Mark Antony to the Senate House,
And he shall say you are not well to-day.
Let me upon my knee prevail in this.
Caesar Mark Antony shall say I am not well,
And for thy humour I will stay at home.

49.

consumed in: consumed, swallowed by.

56.

humour: feeling (of fear); whim.

60.

very happy time: most opportune time.

70.

This line is delivered with the hint of a sneer.
Decius must bring Caesar with him.

78.

lusty: lively, merry.

50

55

[Enter DECIUS.]
Here’s Decius Brutus; he shall tell them so.
Decius Caesar, all hail! Good morrow, worthy
Caesar;
I come to fetch you to the Senate House.
Caesar And you are come in very happy time
To bear my greetings to the senators
And tell them that I will not come to-day.
Cannot, is false; and that I dare not, falser:
I will not come to-day. Tell them so, Decius.
Calpurnia Say he is sick.

60

65

Caesar
Shall Caesar send a lie?
Have I in conquest stretched mine arm so far
To be afeard to tell greybeards the truth?
Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come.
Decius Most mighty Caesar, let me know some
cause,
Lest I be laughed at when I tell them so.
Caesar The cause is in my will: I will not come.
That is enough to satisfy the Senate;
But for your private satisfaction,
Because I love you, I will let you know.
Calpurnia here, my wife, stays me at home.
She dreamt to-night she saw my statue,
Which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts,
Did run pure blood; and many lusty Romans

70

75

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Came smiling and did bathe their hands in it.
And these does she apply for warnings and portents
And evils imminent, and on her knee
Hath begged that I will stay at home to-day.
Decius This dream is all amiss interpreted;
It was a vision fair and fortunate.
Your statue spouting blood in many pipes,
In which so many smiling Romans bathed,
Signifies that from you great Rome shall suck
Reviving blood, and that great men shall press
For tinctures, stains, relics, and cognizance.
This by Calpurnia’s dream is signified.

Act II, Scene 2

80

80.

apply: interpret.

89.

tinctures: stains or colours used on coats-of-arms.

85

relics: remembrances of a saint.

90

Caesar And this way have you well expounded it.
Decius I have, when you have heard what I can say;
And know it now. The Senate have concluded
To give this day a crown to mighty Caesar.
If you shall send them word you will not come,
Their minds may change. Besides, it were a mock
Apt to be rendered, for some one to say
‘Break up the Senate till another time,
When Caesar’s wife shall meet with better dreams.’
If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper
‘Lo. Caesar is afraid?’
Pardon me, Caesar; for my dear dear love
To your proceeding bids me tell you this,
And reason to my love is liable.
Caesar How foolish do your fears seem now,
Calpurnia!
I am ashamed I did yield to them.
Give me my robe, for I will go.

cognizance: a mark of distinction.

95
96–7.

mock . . . rendered: i.e., the kind of sarcastic remark
one might expect.

103.

proceeding: advancement or career.

104.

reason . . . liable: i.e., my love for you is stronger
than my reason (or sense of propriety) in daring to
advise you in this way.

107.

robe: the furred Elizabethan robe, or possibly some
garment meant to resemble a toga.

100

105

[Enter BRUTUS, LIGARIUS, METELLUS, CASCA, TREBONIUS, CINNA, and PUBLIUS.]
And look where Publius is come to fetch me.
Publius Good morrow, Caesar.
Caesar
Welcome, Publius.
What, Brutus, are you stirred so early too?
Good morrow, Casca. Caius Ligarius,

75

110

76

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 2

Caesar was ne’er so much your enemy
As that same ague which hath made you lean.
What is’t o’clock?

113.

ague: fever.

118.

prepare: i.e., the wine.

122.

remember that you: remember to.

Caesar Good friends, go in and taste some wine
with me
And we (like friends) will straightway go together.

127.

Brutus [Aside.] That every like is not the same.
O Caesar
The heart of Brutus erns to think upon.

i.e., both friends and enemies may appear “like”
friends.

129.

erns: grieves.

Brutus.

Caesar, ’tis strucken eight.

Caesar I thank you for your pains and courtesy.

115

[Enter ANTONY.]
See! Antony, that revels long a-nights,
Is notwithstanding up. Good morrow, Antony.
Antony So to most noble Caesar.
Caesar
Bid them prepare within.
I am to blame to be thus waited for.
Now, Cinna. Now, Metellus. What, Trebonius;
120
I have an hour’s talk in store for you;
Remember that you call on me to-day;
Be near me, that I may remember you.
Trebonius Caesar, I will [Aside.] And so near will
I be
That your best friends shall wish I had been further.

[Exeunt.]

125

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 2

77

COMMENTARY

S

cene two shifts from the home of Brutus to Caesar’s
house in the early morning of the Ides of March.
The storm of the previous scene continues to rage. Just
as the private side of Brutus was exposed in the last
scene, here Shakespeare shows us the private side of
Caesar. By showing in consecutive scenes, both men in
their homes, in conversations with their wives, Shakespeare highlights the parallel lives of the two men. Both
men have had sleepless nights; both have wives concerned with their well being; and, as the play progresses, Brutus will become more and more like the
man he seeks to destroy.
The foreshadowing of Caesar’s imminent death
begins early on in this scene as Caesar comments on
the dreams that have tormented his wife, Calpurnia, all
night. Immediately following his revelations that Calpurnia has cried out in her sleep, “They murder Caesar,”
Caesar instructs his servant to have the priests sacrifice an animal for the purpose of determining the future.
Obviously, Caesar is concerned with the possible portents in Calpurnia’s dream and this bears out Cassius’
claim that he has become quite superstitious lately.
Alone, the private Caesar is a fearful man concerned
with what the signs point to as an ominous future.

The Capitoline and the Forum.
Gianni Tortoli/Ancient Art & Architecture Collection Ltd.

Upon Calpurnia’s entrance, Caesar replaces his public mask and begins by speaking of himself in the third
person. Even with his wife and in the privacy of his own
chambers, Caesar is unwilling to cast off his god-like
demeanor. If there had been a humble Caesar before
this time, he is gone now, and in his place is a man who
is promoting his own glorification. Calpurnia relates
what she has heard of the strange events of the previous night. She speaks of lions giving birth in the streets
and graves that have opened and “yielded up their
dead.” She tells of blood dripping upon the capitol and
comets blazing through the heavens and Caesar discounts every single omen. (The sighting of a comet had
always held the connotation of the death of a monarch.)
In July (the month of Caesar’s birth) of 44 B.C., four
months after Caesar’s death, a comet, so bright that it
could be seen during the day, was observed for seven
days in the skies above Rome. Octavius Caesar used
the phenomena to encourage the myth of Caesar’s
deification.
When the servant appears, he informs Caesar that
the priests insist that Caesar stay home today because
there was no heart found in the morning’s sacrifice, and
still Caesar refuses to be swayed. Caesar is purposely
tempting the Fates by denying every sign they have
sent to him to prevent his
death. He seems to recognize the hand Fate plays in
the lives of ordinary men
but pompously ignores it in
reference to himself:
“these predictions / Are to
the world in general as to
Caesar.” Calpurnia, frightened and frustrated by
Caesar’s
refusal
to
acknowledge the signs
sent by the gods, accuses
him of allowing his wisdom
to be destroyed by his conceit. The moment Caesar
acquiesces to Calpurnia
and agrees to stay home,

78

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 2

Decius makes his entrance.
His plan (to make sure that
Caesar goes to the capitol)
is in immediate danger of
being thwarted. Decius
wants to know why Caesar
is not planning to go to the
Capitol, and Caesar relates
Calpurnia’s dream to him.
Decius, as promised, is a
master of manipulation,
and he begins to work his
sorcery on Caesar by
appealing to his vanity. He
tells Caesar that “This
dream is all amiss interpreted,” and, with those
few words, Decius articulates one of the major
themes present in Julius
Caesar, the manipulation of
both fact and fallacy to
achieve one’s own end.
Julius Caesar and the Conspirators.

So much in this play is Mary Evans Picture Library
misinterpreted by so many,
and the distortions are often a result of the characters’
ego-driven desire to be proven right. The conspirators
misconstrue the feelings of the common people towards
Caesar. Casca, Cassius, and Caesar all confuse the
signs and omens of the storm. Brutus continually misinterprets people and situations, and Cassius will die
when he misinterprets a message at the end of the play.
In this particular instance, Decius, appealing to Caesar’s
vanity, reinterprets Calpurnia’s dream from something
ominous into something fortuitous. Instead of interpreting Caesar’s blood pouring from the statue as a sign of
his impending death, Decius declares that the blood is
a sign that Caesar provides the nourishment that will
heal Rome and its people. In a clever display of flattery,
Decius imposes religious connotations on the dream,
suggesting that the people of Rome, rather than rejoicing in Caesar’s spilt blood, are actually searching for
“tinctures, stains, relics, and cognizance.” The reference to religious icons places Caesar in the shadow of

sainthood, referring to the belief that handkerchiefs
dipped in the blood of martyrs had healing properties.
Just as Caesar’s death is foreshadowed in Calpurnia’s
dream, Decius foreshadows Caesar’s eventual martyrdom and rise to virtual sainthood in his ironic interpretation of the dream’s symbolism.
Not wanting to risk the chance that Caesar may still
refuse to go to the Capitol, Decius reminds him that the
Senate is planning to give him a crown that day. He also
warns Caesar that the Senators might possibly ridicule
him if he stays home because his wife has had a bad
dream. Caesar is swayed and, just as he agrees to leave
for the Capitol, the other conspirators enter the scene.
Interestingly, Cassius is conspicuously missing from
the list of conspirators named in the stage directions.
Considering his insistence in the previous scene that
“we will all of us be there to fetch him,” it seems most
strange that Cassius would not be among his co-conspirators at such a crucial moment. Perhaps Cassius is

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar
aware that Caesar does not trust him and so he makes
the decision to stay away in order to not arouse Caesar’s suspicion. After close examination of the play, textual scholars such as Fredson Bowers suggest that the
parts of Cassius and Ligarius were played by the same
actor. In scenes where Cassius appears, Ligarius is not
on stage, and when Ligarius is seen, Cassius is missing.
In this scene, Ligarius is listed as present in the stage
directions and Publius, a character unknown up to this
point has the honor of speaking first to Caesar.

Act II, Scene 2

79

Caesar affably welcomes the conspirators into his
home and invites them to share wine with him. Again,
the biblical reference to the Last Supper is obvious as
Caesar shares wine with the men who will betray him.
The scene also, once again, establishes parallels
between Caesar and Brutus. In addition to the aspects
already pointed out, both men are gracious hosts; they
both are swayed easily by flattery and fatally trust the
words and friendship of the conspirators.

80

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 3

Act II,
Scene 3

Artimedorus has learned of the plot to murder Caesar. He writes a letter
naming the conspirators, which he intends to give to Caesar as he passes
on the way to the Capitol.

ACT II, SCENE 3.
A street.

NOTES

[Enter ARTEMIDORUS, reading a paper.]
Artemidorus “Caesar, beware of Brutus; take heed
of Cassius; come not near Casca; have an eye to
Cinna; trust not Trebonius; mark well Metellus
Cimber; Decius Brutus loves thee not; thou hast
wronged Caius Ligarius. There is but one mind in
5
all these men, and it is bent against Caesar. If thou
beest not immortal, look about you. Security gives
way to conspiracy. The mighty gods defend thee!
Thy lover,
Artemidorus.” 10
Here will I stand till Caesar pass along
And as a suitor will I give him this.
My heart laments that virtue cannot live
Out of the teeth of emulation.
If thou read this, O Caesar, thou mayest live;
15
If not, the Fates with traitors do contrive. [Exit.]

7.

Security: i.e., an unwarranted sense of security.

9.

lover: friend.

12.

suitor: petitioner.

14.

Out . . . emulation: i.e., safe from the bite of envy.

16.

Fates: in classical mythology, the three goddesses
who directed human destinies.
contrive: conspire.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 3

81

COMMENTARY

A

ccording to Plutarch, Artemidorus, a professor of
rhetoric, taught, and thereby associated with, many
of Brutus’ confidants and thus knew of the plot against
Caesar. Artemidorus, listing the conspirators by name,
has put his information into a letter that he intends to
pass to Caesar as he approaches the Capitol. His
attempt to save Caesar illustrates that Caesar has supporters as well as enemies, and, for the first time in the
play, the conspirators are referred to as “traitorous.”

This short scene, allowing for the passage of time
between Caesar’s leaving home and arrival at the capitol, also serves to create dramatic tension. Even though
the reader knows that Caesar will die, the letter builds
the suspense and gives hope that this Caesar might
survive.

82

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 4

Act II,
Scene 4

Brutus has shared his secrets with his wife, Portia, and she is frantic to
hear news from the Capitol. She is afraid her nervousness will give the
plot away, destroying her husband. The Soothsayer encounters Portia on
his way to warn Caesar one final time.

ACT II, SCENE 4.
Before Brutus’ house.

NOTES

[Enter PORTIA and LUCIUS.]
Portia I prithee, boy, run to the Senate House.
Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone!
Why dost thou stay?
Lucius

1.

prithee: pray thee

6.

constancy: strength, self-control.

8.

might: strength, i.e., a woman’s strength.

9.

counsel: secret information. Portia has been told
of the plot. That there seems to be no time at
which Brutus might have told her is irrelevant.
This sort of double-time was a convention of the
Elizabethan stage, and the difficulty is never
noticed during a performance.

To know my errand, madam.

Portia I would have had thee there and here again
Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there.
[Aside.] O constancy, be strong upon my side,
Set a huge mountain ’tween my heart and tongue!
I have a man’s mind, but a woman’s might.
How hard it is for women to keep counsel!
Art thou here yet?

5

10

Lucius
Madam, what should I do?
Run to the Capitol and nothing else?
Portia Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look
well,
For he went sickly forth; and take good note
What Caesar doth, what suitors press to him.
Hark, boy! What noise is that?

15

Lucius I hear none, madam.
Portia
Prithee listen well.
I heard a bustling rumour like a fray,
And the wind brings it from the Capitol.

17.

bustling rumour: confused noise.

19.

sooth: in truth.

S.D.

The reappearance at this point of the Soothsayer
who had already warned Caesar of the ides of
March (I.2.18) heightens the tension.

Lucius Sooth, madam, I hear nothing.
[Enter the Soothsayer.]
Portia Come hither, fellow. Which way hast thou
been?

20

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act II, Scene 4

83

Soothsayer At mine own house, good lady.
Portia What is’t o’clock?
Soothsayer

About the ninth hour, lady.

Portia Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol?
Soothsayer Madam, not yet. I go take my stand,
To see him pass on to the Capitol.
Portia Thou hast some suit to Caesar, hast thou
not?

25

Soothsayer That I have, lady, if it will please
Caesar
To be so good to Caesar as to hear me:
I shall beseech him to befriend himself.

25.

suit: message

29.

befriend: guard

34.

praetors: high ranking officials.

36.

void: empty.

41.

Sure . . . me: Portia suddenly remembers Lucius,
who is standing near.

43.

commend me to: give my wishes for success to.

S.D.

severally: by separate entrances at either side of the
stage.

Portia Why, know’st thou any harm’s intended
towards him?
Soothsayer. None that I know will be, much that I
fear may chance.
Good morrow to you. Here the street is narrow.
The throng that follows Caesar at the heels,
Of senators, of praetors, common suitors,
Will crowd a feeble man almost to death.
I’ll get me to a place more void and there
Speak to great Caesar as he comes along. [Exit.]
Portia I must go in. Ay me, how weak a thing
The heart of woman is! O Brutus,
The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise!
Sure the boy heard me. — Brutus hath a suit
That Caesar will not grant. — O, I grow faint. —
Run, Lucius, and commend me to my lord;
Say I am merry. Come to me again
And bring me word what he doth say to thee.
[Exeunt severally.]

30

35

40

45

84

Act II, Scene 4

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

COMMENTARY

S

hakespeare continues to build the suspense that
will lead up to Caesar’s assassination. Waiting is a
suspenseful activity, and Act II has been a continuous
round of waiting: waiting out the storm, waiting for the
conspirators to arrive, waiting for the dawn, waiting to
go to the Senate, and now, Portia waits to hear news
from the capitol. In this scene, Portia’s frantic behavior
leads the audience to believe that Brutus has indeed
kept his promise to reveal all of his secrets to his wife.
Portia commands Lucius to run to the Senate House, but
she forgets to tell him why he is to go. In his confusion,
Lucius does not leave and Portia seems almost surprised to see him still standing there. She quickly makes
up a story concerning her worry about Brutus’ health.

Senate House. Having been with Caesar when he was
originally warned by the soothsayer to “Beware the
Ides of March,” Portia must be struck by the significance of the earlier warning. Her anxiety grows
because of what she knows will happen in the Capitol
in a very short time. She questions the soothsayer, asking him where he has been and what time it is. Portia
then asks the question most pressing in her mind: “Is
Caesar gone to the Capitol?” The soothsayer assures
Portia that he is not there yet and verifies Portia’s intimation that he has a suit for Caesar. The soothsayer
repeats his apprehension that something will happen
today to Caesar and expresses his desire to speak to
Caesar about his fears as he passes through the streets.

Using personification, a figure of speech where
something not human is given human qualities, Portia
calls upon constancy to give her strength and “Set a
huge mountain ‘tween my heart and tongue!” Having
once pleaded to be made privy to the conspiracy, Portia is now burdened by Brutus’ secrets. Fearing that she
will betray her husband, Portia laments that despite her
masculine mind she has only a woman’s strength.

Portia, feeling faint and overcome by the emotional
turmoil of the day, blames her woman’s heart for her
weakness. She offers a prayer for the success of her
husband’s enterprise and exits the scene. This is the last
time Portia is seen on the stage, but it becomes evident
later in the play that, like Caesar, she becomes an innocent victim of her husband’s actions.

Portia’s hysteria makes her imagine that she hears
noises coming from the capitol and she is surprised and
concerned to see the Soothsayer making his way to the

Notes
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________

CLIFFSCOMPLETE

JULIUS CAESAR

ACT III
Scene 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Scene 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
Scene 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115

Cinna O Caesar.
Caesar Hence! Wilt thou lift up Olympus?
Decius Great Caesar.
Caesar Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?
Casca Speak hands for me.
Caesar Et tu, Brute? — Then fall Caesar.
Cinna Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead!
Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets!

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III,
Scene 1

Act III, Scene 1

89

On the way to the Capitol, Caesar encounters the soothsayer. Caesar
again ignores his warnings and when Artemidorus tries to give his letter
to Caesar, Caesar refuses to read it until later. Cassius is nervous that the
plot has been discovered but all progresses as planned. Inside the
Senate, Metellus Cimber approaches Caesar to ask for enfranchisement
for his banished brother. All the other conspirators approach Caesar one
by one supposedly on behalf of Cimber’s brother. Brutus is the last to
approach. Caesar refuses to change his mind, claiming he is as constant
as the Northern star. As planned, Casca is the first to stab Caesar. The
other conspirators follow suit but Caesar refuses to die until Brutus
renders the final cut. Caesar falls dead at the base of Pompey’s statue and
the senators, thrown into a state of confusion, run panicked into the
streets. Antony sends his servant to ask permission for him to return to
the Senate to hear the reasons for Caesar’s murder. When he arrives,
Antony pretends to befriend the conspirators, shaking their bloody hands.
He asks permission to speak at Caesar’s funeral and Brutus, against
Cassius’ wishes, gives him his consent. The conspirators leave to explain
to the people why they killed Caesar, leaving Antony alone with Caesar’s
mutilated body. Antony’s deep grief becomes apparent as he vows to
revenge Caesar’s murder. A servant arrives, informing Antony that
Caesar’s nephew, Octavius, is on his way to Rome.

ACT III, SCENE 1.
Rome, before the Capitol.

NOTES

[Flourish. Enter CAESAR, BRUTUS, CASSIUS, CASCA,
DECIUS, METELLUS, TREBONIUS, CINNA,
ANTONY, LEPIDUS, ARTEMIDORUS, POPILIUS,
PUBLIUS, and the Soothsayer.]
Caesar The ides of March are come.
Soothsayer Ay, Caesar, but not gone.
Artemidorus Hail, Caesar! Read this schedule.
Decius Trebonius doth desire you to o’erread
(At your best leisure) this his humble suit.
Artemidorus O Caesar, read mine first, for mine’s
a suit

3.

5

schedule: scroll. We know the contents from II.3.

90

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 1

That touches Ceasar nearer. Read it, great Caesar!
Caesar What touches us ourself shall be last served.
Artemidorus Delay not, Caesar! Read it instantly!
Caesar What, is the fellow mad?
Publius

Sirrah, give place.

10

10.

Sirrah: contemptuous form of address, except
when used to a child.

S.D.

An example of the spatial flexibility of the Elizabethan stage. The audience is to imagine a
change of scene at Cassius’ “Come to the Capitol.” The actors, or Caesar, may go to the
recessed inner stage.

19.

sudden: quick.

21.

turn back: i.e., return from this aIive.

28.

presently prefer: bring at once.

29.

addressed: prepared.

Cassius What, urge you your petitions in the street?
Come to the Capitol.
[CAESAR goes to the Capitol, the rest following.]
Popilius I wish your enterprise to-day may thrive.
Cassius What enterprise, Popilius?
Popilius

Fare you well. [Advances to CAESAR.]

Brutus What said Popilius Lena?

15

Cassius He wished to-day our enterprise might
thrive.
I fear our purpose is discovered.
Brutus Look how he makes to Caesar. Mark him.
Cassius Casca, be sudden, for we fear prevention.
Brutus, what shall be done? If this be known,
Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back,
For I will slay myself.

20

Brutus.
Cassius, be constant.
Popilius Lena speaks not of our purposes;
For look, he smiles, and Caesar doth not change.
Cassius Trebonius knows his time, for look you,
Brutus,
He draws Mark Antony out of the way

25

[Exeunt ANTONY and TREBONIUS.]
Decius Where is Metellus Cimber? Let him go
And presently prefer his suit to Caesar.
Brutus He is addressed. Press near and second him.
Cinna Casca, you are the first that rears your hand.
Caesar Are we all ready? What is now amiss
That Caesar and his Senate must redress?

30

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 1

Metellus Most high, most mighty, and most puissant
Caesar,
Metellus Cimber throws before thy seat
An humble heart. [Kneels.]
Caesar
I must prevent thee, Cimber.
These couchings, and these lowly courtesies
Might fire the blood of ordinary men
And turn preordinance and first decree
Into the lane of children. Be not fond
To think that Caesar bears such rebel blood
That will be thawed from the true quality
With that which melteth fools — I mean sweet words,
Low-crooked curtsies, and base spaniel fawning.
Thy brother by decree is banished.
If thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him,
I spurn thee like a cur out of my way.
Know, Caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause
Will he be satisfied.
Metellus Is there no voice more worthy than my
own,
To sound more sweetly in great Caesar’s ear
For the repealing of my banished brother?

35

40

puissant: powerful.

35.

prevent: forestall.

36.

couchings . . . courtesies: grovellings and humble
bowing.

38.

turn . . . decree: i.e., change what has been ordained
and decreed.

39.

lane: pathway. Some editors print “law.”

40.

rebel: unstable, unmanageable.

41–46.

Shakespeare frequently uses these images of melting, thawing, and the fawning of a dog to express
contempt or flattery.

51.

repealing: i.e., repealing the edict that banished his
brother, giving him permission to return to Rome.

54.

freedom of repeal: permission to be recalled.

57.

enfranchisement: restoration of rights as a citizen.

60.

Northern Star: regarded as a symbol of constancy.

62.

no fellow in the firmament: no equal in the heavens.

67.

apprehensive: capable of reasoning.

45

50

55

Cassius
Pardon, Caesar! Caesar, pardon!
As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall
To beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.
Caesar I could be well moved, if I were as you;
If I could pray to move, prayers would move me:
But I am constant as the Northern Star,
Of whose true-fixed and resting quality
There is no fellow in the firmament.
The skies are painted with unnumber’d sparks,
They are all fire, and every one doth shine;
But there’s but one in all doth hold his place.
So in the world: ’tis furnished well with men,
And men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive;

33.

fond: so foolish as.

Brutus I kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, Caesar,
Desiring thee that Publius Cimber may
Have an immediate freedom of repeal.
Caesar What, Brutus?

91

60

65

92

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 1

Yet in the number I do know but one
That unassailable holds on his rank,
Unshaked of motion; and that I am he,
Let me a little show it, even in this —
That I was constant Cimber should be banished
And constant do remain to keep him so.

69.

holds rank: keeps his position.

74.

Olympus: a mountain in Greece, presumed, the
home of the gods; Caesar’s implication is that he
is a god.

75.

bootless: vainly.

77.

Et tu, Brute: And you too, Brutus? The phrase is
not in Plutarch, but was conventionally associated with Caesar’s assassination.

80.

common pulpits: public platforms.

83.

Ambition’s debt: i.e., what Caesar owed to Rome
because of his ambition.

88.

standing: resistance.

94.

abide: be responsible for.

70

Cinna O Caesar.
Caesar

Hence! Wilt thou lift up Olympus?

Decius Great Caesar.
Caesar

Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?

75

Casca Speak hands for me. [They stab CAESAR — CASCA
first, BRUTUS last.]
Caesar Et tu, Brute? — Then fall Caesar. [Dies.]
Cinna Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead!
Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets!
Cassius Some to the common pulpits and cry out
‘Liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!’

80

Brutus People and senators, be not affrighted.
Fly not; stand still. Ambition’s debt is paid.
Casca Go to the pulpit, Brutus.
Decius

And Cassius too.

Brutus Where’s Publius?

85

Cinna Here, quite confounded with the mutiny.
Metellus Stand fast together, lest some friend of
Caesar’s
Should chance —
Brutus Talk not of standing! Publius, good cheer.
There is no harm intended to your person
Nor to no Roman else. So tell them, Publius.

90

Cassius And leave us, Publius, lest that the people,
Rushing on us, should do your age some mischief.
Brutus Do so; and let no man abide this deed
But we the doers.
[Enter TREBONIUS.]

95

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Cassius

Act III, Scene 1

93

Where is Antony?

Trebonius Fled to his house amazed.
Men, wives, and children, stare, cry out, and run,
As it were doomsday.
Brutus
Fates, we will know your pleasures.
That we shall die, we know; ’tis but the time,
And drawing days out, that men stand upon.

100

96.

amazed: in consternation.

100.

drawing . . . upon: length of life, that men consider
important.

104.

abridged: i.e., since we have done Caesar a service
in reducing the time during which he might fear
death, we are his friends.

108.

market place: The Roman Forum.

113.

There is here a pleasant irony that Shakespeare
could not foresee, since he could never have predicted the vast popularity and wide dissemination
of his work in the 400 years following his death.
What would he have made, for example, of this version of the assassination:

Casca Why, he that cuts off twenty years of life
Cuts off so many years of fearing death.
Brutus Grant that, and then is death a benefit.
So are we Caesar’s friends, that have abridged
His time of fearing death. Stoop, Romans, stoop,
And let us bathe our hands in Caesar’s blood
Up to the elbows and besmear our swords.
Then walk we forth, even to the market place,
And waving our red weapons o’er our heads,
Let’s all cry ‘Peace, freedom and liberty!’

105

110

Cassius Stoop then and wash. How many ages
hence
Shall this our lofty scene be acted over
In states unborn and accents yet unknown!
Brutus How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,
That now on Pompey’s basis lies along
No worthier than the dust!

115

CAEZAR. ET TU, BRUTE? Basi, anguka Caezar!

Cassius
So oft as that shall be,
So often shall the knot of us be called
The men that gave their country liberty.

[Anakafu. Waiumbe na raia wanafoka wamepigwa
bumbazi.]

Decius What, shall we forth?

It is taken from a translation of the play into Swahili.

Cassius
Ay, every man away.
Brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heels
With the most boldest and best hearts of Rome.
[Enter a Servant.]
Brutus Soft! who comes here? A friend of Antony’s.
Servant Thus, Brutus, did my master bid me
kneel;
Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down;

CINNA. Uhuru! Uhuru!

114.

in sport: i.e., in the theatre; for entertainment.

115.

Pompey’s basis: the base of Pompey’s statue.

117.

knot: group (of conspirators).

119.

forth: i.e., go forth into the city.

120.

grace his heels: follow him with grace, or honor.

122.

Soft!: wait.

120

94

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 1

And being prostrate, thus he bade me say;
Brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest;
Caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving.
Say I love Brutus and I honour him;
Say I feared Caesar, honoured him, and loved him.
If Brutus will vouchsafe that Antony
May safely come to him and be resolved
How Caesar hath deserved to lie in death,
Mark Antony shall not love Caesar dead
So well as Brutus living; but will follow
The fortunes and affairs of noble Brutus
Thorough the hazards of this untrod state
With all true faith. So, says my master Antony.
Brutus Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman.
I never thought him worse.
Tell him, so please him come unto this place,
He shall be satisfied and, by my honour,
Depart untouched.
Servant

125

130

130.

vouchsafe: promise.

131.

resolved: satisfied.

136.

Thorough: common Elizabethan form of through.

135

untrod state: unknown state of things.

140

I’ll fetch him presently. [Exit.]

Brutus I know that we shall have him well to friend.
Cassius I wish we may. But yet I have a mind
That fears him much; and my misgiving still
Falls shrewdly to the purpose.

143.

well to friend: as a firm friend.

146.

Falls . . . purpose: is close to the truth.

152.

let blood: purged, as in a therapeutic
blood-letting.

145

[Enter ANTONY.]
Brutus But here comes Antony. Welcome, Mark
Antony.
Antony O mighty Caesar! dost thou lie so low?
Are all the conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils,
Shrunk to this little measure? Fare thee well.
I know not gentlemen, what you intend,
Who else must be let blood, who else is rank.
If I myself, there is no hour so fit
As Caesar’s death’s hour; nor no instrument
Of half that worth as those your swords, made rich
With the most noble blood of all this world.
I do beesech ye, if you bear me hard,
Now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke
Fulfil your pleasure. Live a thousand years,

150

rank: unwholesome/swollen with disease. A pun
on too high a rank.

155
155.

made rich: spoken with as much irony as Antony
can here allow himself, as is line 163.

158.

reek and smoke: i.e., are stained with blood.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

I shall not find myself so apt to die;
No place will please me so, no mean of death,
As here by Caesar, and by you cut off,
The choice and master spirits of this age.
Brutus O Antony, beg not your death of us!
Though now we must appear bloody and cruel,
As by our hands and this our present act
You see we do, yet see you but our hands
And this the bleeding business they have done.
Our hearts you see not. They are pitiful;
And pity to the general wrong of Rome
(As fire drives out fire, so pity pity)
Hath done this deed on Caesar. For your part,
To you our swords have leaden points, Mark Antony.
Our arms in strength of malice, and our hearts
Of brothers’ temper do receive you in
With all kind love, good thoughts, and reverence.

Act III, Scene 1

160

Antony
I doubt not of your wisdom.
Let each man render me his bloody hand.
First, Marcus Brutus, will I shake with you;
Next, Caius Cassius, do I take your hand;
Now, Decius Brutus, yours; now yours, Metellus;
Yours, Cinna; and, my valiant Casca, yours.
Though last, not least in love, yours, good Trebonius.
Gentlemen all — Alas, what shall I say?
My credit now stands on such slippery ground
That one of two bad ways you must conceit me,
Either a coward or a flatterer.
That I did love thee, Caesar, O, ’tis true!
If then thy spirit look upon us now,
Shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death
To see thy Antony making his peace,

161.

mean: method, means.

169.

pitiful: full of pity.

171.

The “fire” phrase is proverbial; Brutus means that
pity for Rome drove pity for Caesar out of the conspirators’ hearts.

173.

leaden: blunt.

174–175.

our . . . in: i.e., both our arms, although they appear
hostile, and our hearts, full of brotherly feeling,
receive you.

178.

dignities: honors and offices of state.

181.

deliver: explain at length.

191.

credit: i.e., the trust others may have in me.

165

170

175

Cassius Your voice shall be as strong as any man’s
In the disposing of new dignities.
Brutus Only be patient till we have appeased
The multitude, beside themselves with fear,
And then we will deliver you the cause
Why I, that did love Caesar when I struck him,
Have thus proceeded.

95

180

185

190

slippery ground: reference to the bloody ground.
192.

195

conceit: think of, consider.

96

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 1

Shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes,
Most noble! in the presence of thy corse?
Had I as many eyes as thou hast wounds,
Weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood,
It would become me better than to close
In terms of friendship with thine enemies.
Pardon me, Julius! Here wast thou bayed, brave
hart;
Here didst thou fall; and here thy hunters stand,
Signed in thy spoil, and crimsoned in thy lethe.
O world, thou wast the forest to this hart;
And this indeed, O world, the heart of thee!
How like a deer, stroken by many princes,
Dost thou here lie!

200

202.

close: make an agreement with.
204.

206.

Antony Therefore I took your hands, but was indeed
Swayed from the point by looking down on Caesar.
Friends am I with you all, and love you all,
Upon this hope, that you shall give me reasons
Why and wherein Caesar was dangerous.
Brutus Or else were this a savage spectacle.
Our reasons are so full of good regard
There were you, Antony, the son of Caesar,
You should be satisfied.
Antony
That’s all I seek;
And am moreover suitor that I may
Produce his body to the market place
And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,
Speak in the order of his funeral.
Brutus You shall, Mark Antony.
Cassius
Brutus, a word with you.
[Aside to Brutus.] You know not what you do. Do

Signed . . . spoil: i.e., smeared with the blood of
thy slaughter. Technically, “spoil” refers to those
parts of the hunted animal which were distributed to the hounds.
lethe: in classical mythology, Lethe was a river in
Hades, the waters of which induced forgetfulness. Here, the association is with death
generally.

210

Antony
Pardon me, Caius Cassius.
The enemies of Caesar shall say this:
Then, in a friend, it is cold modesty.

bayed: surrounded by hounds.
hart: deer, with a pun on heart.

205

Cassius Mark Antony —

Cassius I blame you not for praising Caesar so;
But what compact mean you to have with us?
Will you be pricked in number of our friends,
Or shall we on, and not depend on you?

become me better: suit me better, i.e., as Caesar’s
friend.

209.

stroken: struck.

212–213.

enemies . . . modesty: i.e., even Caesar’s enemies
would say as much as this; therefore, it is moderate in a friend.

216.

pricked: marked on a list.

224.

regard: considerations.

227.

And . . . suitor: i.e., and now I ask.

230.

order: ceremony.

215

220

225

230

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 1

not consent
That Antony speak in his funeral.
Know you how much the people may be moved
By that which he will utter?
Brutus [Aside to Cassius.] By your pardon —
will myself into the pulpit first
And show the reasons for our Caesar’s death.
What Antony shall speak, I will protest
He speaks by leave and by permission;
And that we are contented Caesar shall
Have all true rites and lawful ceremonies.
It shall advantage more than do us wrong.

235

238.

protest: announce.

242.

advantage: benefit.

257.

tide of times: stream of time, or history.

263.

Domestic: internal.

264.

cumber: burden.

265.

so in use: so common.

240

Cassius [Aside to Brutus.] I know not what may
fall. I like it not.
Brutus Mark Antony, here, take your Caesar’s body
You shall not in your funeral speech blame us,
But speak all good you can devise of Caesar;
And say you do’t by our permission.
Else shall you not have any hand at all
About his funeral. And you shall speak
In the same pulpit whereto I am going,
After my speech is ended.
Antony
I do desire no more.

245

250

Be it so.

Brutus Prepare the body then, and follow us.
[Exeunt all except ANTONY.]
Antony O, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth,
That I am meek and gentle with these butchers!
Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
That ever lived in the tide of times.
Woe to the hand that shed this costly blood!
Over thy wounds now do I prophesy
(Which, like dumb mouths, do ope their ruby lips
To beg the voice and utterance of my tongue),
A curse shall light upon the limbs of men;
Domestic fury and fierce civil strife
Shall cumber all the parts of Italy;
Blood and destruction shall be so in use
And dreadful objects so familiar

255

260

265

97

98

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 1

That mothers shall but smile when they behold
Their infants quartered with the hands of war,
All pity choked with custom of fell deeds
And Caesar’s spirit, ranging for revenge,
With Ate by his side come hot from hell,
Shall in these confines with a monarch’s voice
Cry ‘Havoc!’ and let slip the dogs of war,
That this foul deed shall smell above the earth
With carrion men, groaning for burial.

270

268.

quartered: cut in pieces.

269.

custom . . . deeds: familiarity with cruel deeds.

270.

ranging: hunting.

271.

Ate: classical goddess of destruction.

272.

confines: localities.

273.

Cry ‘Havoc’: the signal, given by the commander
of a victorious army, for the total destruction of
the enemy.

275

[Enter OCTAVIUS’ servant.]
You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not?

let slip: unleash.
275.

carrion men: decaying corpses.

282.

Thy heart is big: swelling with grief.

283.

Passion: here, grief.

286.

seven leagues: approximately 21 miles.

287.

chanced: happened.

292.

try: test.

294.

cruel issue: the result of the cruelty.

296.

young Octavius: he was between 18 and 21 years
old in 44 B.C.

Servant I do, Mark Antony.
Antony Caesar did write for him to come to Rome.
Servant He did receive his letters and is coming,
And bid me say to you by word of mouth —
O Caesar!
Antony Thy heart is big. Get thee apart and weep.
Passion, I see, is catching; for mine eyes,
Seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine,
Began to water. Is thy master coming?

280

285

Servant He lies to-night within seven leagues of
Rome.
Antony Post back with speed and tell him what
hath chanced.
Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,
No Rome of safety for Octavius yet.
Hie hence and tell him so. Yet stay awhile.
Thou shalt not back till I have born this corse
Into the market place. There shall I try
In my oration how the people take
The cruel issue of these bloody men;
According to the which thou shalt discourse
To young Octavius of the state of things.
Lend me your hand [Exeunt with CAESAR’S body.]

290

295

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 1

99

COMMENTARY

he dramatic tension grows as Caesar’s inevitable
march toward death progresses. He enters the
T
stage followed by the conspirators and is intercepted
by both the Soothsayer and Artemidorus. In a display
seemingly designed to impress his public, Caesar
haughtily dismisses the Soothsayer and, with a show of
false modesty, refuses to read Artemidorus’ note until
later: “What touches us ourself shall be last served.” By
refusing to acknowledge the omens present in the previous evening’s storm, the missing heart in the auguers
sacrifice, Calpurnia’s dream, the soothsayer’s warning,
and Artemidorus’ note, it becomes obvious that Caesar’s
arrogance has triumphed over his wisdom. Any sympathy that the reader might have felt for his plight is now
almost non-existent.
Caesar’s earlier perception that Cassius is a great
observer who sees through the deeds of men is especially significant in this scene. With a heightened sense
of apprehension brought about by the fear of being
caught, Cassius notices Artemidorus trying to pass his
scroll to Caesar and, along with Publius, urges him to
move on to the Capitol. He is then approached by Popilius who expresses his wish that “your enterprise to-day
may thrive.” Cassius feigns ignorance and pretends not
to know what Popilius is speaking about, but his fear
grows as he watches Popilius move toward Caesar’s
side. With the very real possibility of disclosure, Cassius
swears to Brutus that if their plot is discovered he will
kill himself rather than be arrested for treason.
Suicide, to a predominately Christian, Elizabethan
audience, would take on a much different connotation
than it had in ancient Rome. To Shakespeare’s audience,
and indeed to many readers even today, suicide is considered a mortal sin; an act against God and nature. In
Elizabethan England, it was also an act against the government. A suspected victim of suicide would not be
allowed to receive the final sacraments or be buried in
sacred ground. Often, victims of suicide were buried at
the center of a crossroads, because their spirits,
thought to be unable to go to heaven, would wander the
world. Many Elizabethans believed that if the body of a
suicide victim was buried at a crossroads, the ghost of
the victim would not know which direction to follow. All
money and property belonging to the suicide victims
would be confiscated by the state, leaving the surviving
family humiliated and destitute.

From the Roman perspective, however, suicide was
considered an act of heroism if it was done in an effort
to avoid living a life that conflicted with the moral and
ethical values held in esteem by the person committing
the act. For Cassius, living under the tyranny of Caesar
was unthinkable. Thus, death would become his only
alternative. For many members of Shakespeare’s original audience, Cassius’ desire to die rather than be
arrested for treason was an emotion they could identify
with. The severed heads of men and women accused
of treason against the Crown, more often than not,
adorned the spikes along the castle walls in London.
Shakespeare’s plays were written specifically for
performance, and his stage directions are often indicated within the text rather than added to the script.
Lines 25–26 represent an example of what is known as
an implied stage direction. Cassius points out to Brutus
that Trebonius has set into motion the next stage of the
plot against Caesar: “Trebonius knows his time, for look
you, Brutus, / He draws Mark Antony out of the way.”
This would indicate to an actor that he must engage
Mark Antony in some way that would “draw” him from
the stage.
With Mark Antony out of the way, Decius comes forward to put the last moves of the conspiracy into place.
Metellus Cimber is to approach Caesar first to ask for
pardon for his banished brother. Each conspirator in
turn will then join with Cimber until Caesar is surrounded and Casca is assigned the job of being the first
to stab Caesar. Caesar takes his place and prepares to
address the business of the day.
As planned, Metellus Cimber approaches Caesar
and asks for the reinstatement of his brother as a
Roman Citizen. Caesar’s arrogance reaches astounding
proportions as he refuses Cimber’s plea based on his
distaste for flattery and his power to remain constant.
Ironically, Caesar’s tendency to be swayed by flattery
was just witnessed in the preceding scene and his constancy is ambiguous at best. For example, he has just
spent much of the previous scene vacillating between
staying home or going to the capitol and faltering from
one interpretation of Calpurnia’s dream to the other.
Shakespeare is a master at showing both sides of an
issue or a character, and it is possible to interpret Caesar’s recent actions in other ways. The qualities that

100

Act III, Scene 1

comprise a great leader is a major theme in Julius Caesar, and an issue that is often and hotly debated. Even
though Caesar’s arrogance seems to be the motivating
factor in much that he does, it is also possible to look at
his choices in another manner. With regards to Artemidorus’ letter for example, Caesar refuses to look at it
until later, because the matter within the letter is personal to Caesar. Possibly, this choice illustrates Caesar’s
propensity to put the issues of the people above his own
concerns. Constancy is also an important quality in an
effective leader. It is unjust to have one set of rules for
friends and another set for everyone else. In his “Northern Star” speech, Caesar is maintaining a firm position
based on the laws of Rome and the judgment passed on
Metellus Cimber’s brother by the ruling factions in the
government. Mercy and compassion must figure into
the laws of the land but is it not the leader’s responsibility to maintain those laws as set down without displaying favoritism?
Caesar’s choices can be argued to be either arrogant
or admirable but it is his growing sense of his own deification that destroys the man. By comparing himself to
Olympus, a mountain in Greece presumed to be the
home of the gods, Caesar is publicly declaring a godlike presence within himself. However, instead of showing god-like mercy and compassion by pardoning
Cimber’s brother, Caesar chooses to exhibit the very
human quality of fundamental stubbornness. By the time

Julius Caesar is assassinated in the Senate by Brutus and his companions.
Mary Evans Picture Library

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar
Casca raises his hand against Caesar, it is almost a
relief to the reader to bring an end to Caesar’s egotistical hubris.
Despite Brutus’ earlier instructions that Caesar’s
death should be as clean as possible, each conspirator
takes his turn at Caesar. Having endured twenty-two
stab wounds, the still standing Caesar, his lacerations
pouring forth blood, becomes the fulfillment of Calpurnia’s dream. It is the twenty-third wound, however,
inflicted by Brutus, the man he loved and perhaps
fathered, that causes Caesar’s life force to vanish, and
he falls dead to the floor. The sympathy of the audience
immediately swings back to Caesar as the pathos of his
last words — “Et tu, Brute? — Then fall Caesar” —
echoes through the stunned and silent Senate.
Cinna breaks the eerie silence with his cries of “Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead!” Chaos ensues and all
but one senator run into the streets proclaiming the
news of Caesar’s assassination. In a brilliant stroke that
in the middle of this carnage adds a decidedly compassionate edge to both Brutus and Cassius, Shakespeare
leaves one aging senator alone on the stage with the
conspirators. Brutus assures the frightened old man
that he will not be harmed and Cassius worries that
Publius might be hurt in the madness and suggests that
he leave right away.
According to Plutarch, each member of the conspiracy, in order to be equally
involved in the murder, had
agreed to stab Caesar at
least once. With twentythree stab wounds, Caesar’s body resembled more
the hacked carcass than
the sacrificial “dish for the
gods” that Brutus had
aspired to. Bladders or
sponges full of animal blood
were concealed under costumes and when Caesar
was stabbed, the actor
playing Caesar would be
saturated in the blood. This
sight, along with the very
real and pungent smell of
animal blood that would

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar
permeate the Elizabethan theatre, certainly made the semblance of the conspirators as
butchers a very powerful and
vivid image.
Part of the ceremony of the
Lupercalian Festival that opened
this play was the ritualistic sacrifice of a goat. The blood of the
animal would then be smeared
on the bodies of young men. By
washing their hands in Caesar’s
blood, the conspirators not only
fulfill the final prophecy of
Calpurnia’s dream but also reenact a “religious ceremony” that
will allow Brutus to continue to
believe that this act was more
than just a murder.
Blood as a pervading image in
the play is no more evident than
it is at this moment in the script.
The vision of Caesar’s bleeding
body will silently but forcefully The assassination of Julius Caesar.
dominate the next 450 lines of Mary Evans Picture Library
this act. Caesar’s blood not only
flows across the stage but also now covers the arms
and hands as well as the weapons of the murderers. As
with almost every image in the play, this one can be
interpreted in numerous ways. If the murder of Caesar
was a barbaric deed done to further the personal agendas of greedy, jealous men, then the blood on the hands
of the conspirators is a sign of guilt. If, however, the
murder is a sacrificial purging of the sickness that runs
through the body politic of Rome, then the blood
becomes a symbol of catharsis and purification.
Throughout the play, Brutus’ poor political judgment
has laid the foundation for the failure of the conspiracy.
In this scene, the reader is also made privy to Brutus’
naivete. Not only does Brutus convince himself that
Caesar’s murder was a sacrifice, making heroes of the
conspirators, but he justifies the act as beneficial,
rationalizing it by believing that he has actually saved
Caesar from the terrible fate of having to spend too
many years fearing death.

Act III, Scene 1

101

In the highly charged elation
of the moments following Caesar’s death, Shakespeare uses a
dramatic construct that has
come to be known as
metadrama or metatheatre.
Throughout many of his plays,
Shakespeare makes reference
to his belief that “All the world’s
a stage, / And all the men and
women merely players” and he
frequently uses the convention
of the play-within-the-play in
such works as A Midsummer’s
Night Dream and Hamlet.
Metadrama is much like a picture of a mirror that must reflect
itself into infinity. Which is the
real image and which is just a
mere reflection? The reader is
jolted from the suspension of disbelief into a very different dimension of theatricality, one that
highlights the capricious and
illusory nature of the theatre.
Brutus and Cassius, casting
themselves as the leading players in this “lofty scene,” can believe themselves to be
heroes and, in a very real sense, by hiding behind the
metaphorical mask of actors, absolve themselves from
their horrendous deed.
Cassius’ question, “How many ages hence / Shall
this our lofty scene be acted over / In states unborn and
accents yet unknown!” is prophetic in many ways.
Shakespeare’s play has been performed consistently for
the almost 400 years since his death and in languages
unheard and in countries undiscovered at the time the
play was written. To modern readers it takes on an even
deeper meaning, because history has continued to
repeat itself with the assassinations of great leaders
such as Ghandi, John Kennedy, and Martin Luther King,
Jr. As long as men have power, there will be other men
who will kill to gain it.
As the conspirators are preparing to leave the Capitol to explain their deeds to the masses, a servant sent
by Mark Antony detains them. Up to this point in the

102

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 1

play, Antony has been a minor character, one who
raised more contempt than concern. Only Cassius
thought of him as a possible threat. The frivolous Mark
Antony seen in the earlier scenes of the play now transforms himself into a shrewd, clever, and astute
politician.
Antony is aware enough to know that if anyone other
than Caesar is to die, it will be him. So Antony sends his
servant to the conspirators with a well-prepared speech
to make sure it is safe to approach. The message, as
related by the servant, foreshadows Antony’s ability to
manipulate both people and situations with his words.
The first line of the message appeals to Brutus’ vanity,
calling him, “noble, wise, valiant, and honest.” Cassius
voices his misgivings but Brutus overrules him and
allows Antony to enter the Capitol for an explanation of
Caesar’s murder.
Antony is shocked and dismayed to see the ravaged
body of Caesar, but he knows he must bide his time and
make friends with the conspirators if he is to avenge
Caesar’s death. Antony continues the running metaphor of
both disease and blood when he
asks, “Who else must be let
blood, who else is rank.” If the
body politic is swollen with disease, then the blood of Antony
may be required to purge the
state, restoring it to health. Brutus assures him that the conspirators have no desire to harm him
in any way. Cassius, with his
usual political acuity, cuts
through Brutus’ offer of love and
reverence to offer Antony the
more practical and desirable
proposal: a share of the power
and perks in the new government.
Antony does not answer Cassius’ offers but proceeds, in a
show of friendship and respect,
to shake the bloody hand of each
of the conspirators. With Caesar’s blood on his own hands,
Antony evokes Caesar’s spirit for
the first time. Caesar’s spirit will

Caesar dead.
Mary Evans Picture Library

pervade the remainder of the play, and, though his body
is dead, his influence lives on. Again, Cassius interrupts
Antony and insists upon knowing whether Antony is to
be counted as a friend of the conspiracy. Antony gives
an evasive answer and quickly changes the subject,
asking for permission to speak at a funeral for Caesar.
Brutus agrees immediately, but Cassius, having noticed
Antony’s evasive answers when questioned about his
loyalty to the conspiracy, takes Brutus aside and cautions him not to make the mistake of allowing Antony to
speak at the funeral. Brutus refuses to listen to Cassius’
fears and proceeds to turn Caesar’s body over to Antony
with a set of instructions for his funeral speech.
It was not uncommon for the body of a man who had
transgressed against the state to be left unburied in the
City Square. The family would be dishonored by having
to watch the unconsecrated body of their loved one
eaten by dogs and picked at by birds. The conspirators,
seeing Caesar as an enemy of the state, would have
been justified in leaving Caesar’s body in the square, so
their agreement to allow him a proper burial was a generous concession. Brutus
instructs Antony to “prepare” or
clean Caesar’s body, and wrap it
in a fresh shroud before following them to the pulpit where
Brutus plans to speak.
Left alone, Antony finally
reveals his true feelings toward
the men he calls “butchers.” Calling on the gods, Antony curses
both the conspirators and Rome.
Using images that are both
bloody and brutal, Antony invokes
the spirit of Caesar and vows to
revenge Caesar’s murder by
unleashing the most devastating
and destructive forces of hell. As
though his prayers are immediately answered, a servant enters
with the news that Octavius Caesar, Julius’ grandnephew, his only
living relative and heir, is within 21
miles of Rome. Julius may be
dead but another Caesar moves
in quickly to assume his role and
take his place.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III,
Scene 2

Act III, Scene 2

103

Brutus addresses the people of Rome telling them that the conspirators
killed Caesar because he was ambitious. The people seem to be satisfied
with that explanation and cry out for Brutus to be “Caesar.” Antony
arrives with Caesar’s body to address the crowd and Brutus departs,
leaving Antony alone to deliver his funeral speech. Antony turns the
crowd against the conspirators. The violent mob disperses, creating
havoc and running the conspirators out of Rome. Antony receives the
news that Octavius has arrived in Rome.

ACT III, SCENE 2.
The Forum.

NOTES

[Enter BRUTUS and goes into the pulpit, and CASSIUS and
the citizens.]
Citizens We will be satisfied! Let us be satisfied!
Brutus Then follow me and give me audience,
friends.
Cassius, go you into the other street
And part the numbers.
Those that will hear me speak, let ’em stay here;
Those that will follow Cassius, go with him;
And public reasons shall be rendered
Of Caesar’s death.
1st Citizen

1.

will be satisfied: have a full explanation.

4.

part the numbers: divide the people.

7.

public reasons: (1) reasons for the public to hear, or
(2) reasons having to do with the public good.

5

I will hear Brutus speak.

2nd Citizen I will hear Cassius, and compare their
reasons
When severally we bear them rendered.

10

10.

severally: separately.

13.

lovers: dear friends.

15.

have respect to: remember.

16.

Censure: judge.

3rd Citizen The noble Brutus is ascended. Silence!
Brutus Be patient till the last.
Romans, countrymen, and lovers, bear me for my
cause, and be silent, that you may hear. Believe
me for mine honour, and have respect to mine honour, that you may believe. Censure me in your
wisdom and awake your senses, that you may the
better judge. If there be any in this assembly, any
dear friend of Caesar’s, to him I say that Brutus’
love to Caesar was no less than his. If then that
friend demand why Brutus rose against Caesar,

15

20

104

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 2

this is my answer: Not that I loved Caesar less,
but that I loved Rome more. Had you rather Caesar
were living, and die all slaves, than that Caesar
were dead, to live all freemen? As Caesar loved
me, I weep for him; as he was fortunate, I rejoice
at it; as he was valiant, I honour him; but —
as he was ambitious, I slew him. There is tears for
his love; joy for his fortune; honour for his valour;
and death for his ambition. Who is here so base that
would be a bondman? If any, speak; for him I have
offended. Who is here so rude that would not be a
Roman? If any, speak; for him have I offended.
Who is here so vile that will not love his country? If
any, speak; for him I have offended. I pause for a
reply.

25

30
31.

bondman: slave.

32.

rude: uncivilized, barbaric.

40.

enrolled: officially recorded.

41.

extenuated: understated.

42.

enforced: overstated.

45.

place: i.e., as a free citizen.

47.

lover: friend.

35

All None, Brutus, none!
Brutus Then none have I offended. I have done
no more to Caesar than you shall do to Brutus. The
question of his death is enrolled in the Capitol; his
glory not extenuated, wherein he was worthy; nor
his offenses enforced, for which he suffered death.

40

[Enter MARK ANTONY and others, with CAESAR’S body.]
Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony,
who, though he had no hand in his death, shall receive the benefit of his dying, a place in the com45
monwealth, as which of you shall not? With this I
depart, that, as I slew my best lover for the good
of Rome, I have the same dagger for myself when it
shall please my country to need my death.
All Live, Brutus! Live, live!

50

1st Citizen Bring him with triumph home unto his
house.
2nd Citizen Give him a statue with his ancestors.
3rd Citizen Let him be Caesar.
4th Citizen
Shall be crowned in Brutus.

Caesar’s better parts

1st Citizen We’ll bring him to his house with shouts
and clamours.

55

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 2

105

Brutus My countrymen —
2nd Citizen

Peace! Silence! Brutus speaks,

1st Citizen Peace, ho!
Brutus Good countrymen, let me depart alone,
And for my sake, stay here with Antony.
Do grace to Caesar’s corse, and grace his speech
Tending to Caesar’s glories which Mark Antony,
By our permission, is allowed to make.
I do entreat you, not a man depart,
Save I alone, till Antony have spoke. [Exit.]
1st Citizen Stay, ho! and let us hear Mark Antony.

60

60.

grace: i.e., treat with respect both Caesar’s body and
the speech which Antony is about to make.

68.

beholding: indebted.

83.

answered it: paid the penalty for it.

65

3rd Citizen Let him go up into the public chair.
We’ll hear him, noble Antony, go up.
Antony For Brutus sake I am beholding to you.
[ANTONY goes into the pulpit.]
4th Citizen What does he say of Brutus?
3rd Citizen
He says for Brutus’ sake
70
He finds himself beholding to us all.
4th Citizen ’Twere best he speak no harm of
Brutus here!
1st Citizen This Caesar was a tyrant.
3rd Citizen
Nay, that’s certain.
We are blest that Rome is rid of him.
2nd Citizen Peace! Let us hear what Antony can say.
Antony You gentle Romans —
All

75

Peace, ho! Let us hear him.

Antony Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me
your ears;
I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
The evil that men do lives after them;
The good is oft interred with their bones.
So let it be with Caesar. The noble Brutus
Hath told you Caesar was ambitious.
If it were so, it was a grievous fault,
And grievously hath Caesar answered it.

80

106

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 2

Here under leave of Brutus and the rest
(For Brutus is an honourable man;
So are they all, all honourable men),
Come I to speak in Caesar’s funeral.
He was my friend, faithful and just to me;
But Brutus says he was ambitious,
And Brutus is an honourable man.
He hath brought many captives home to Rome,
Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill.
Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?
When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept;
Ambition should be made of sterner stuff.
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;
And Brutus is an honourable man.
You all did see that on the Lupercal
I thrice presented him a kingly crown,
Which he did thrice refuse. Was this ambition?
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;
And sure he is an honourable man.
I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,
But here I am to speak what I do know.
You all did love him once, not without cause.
What cause withholds you then to mourn for him?
O judgment, thou art fled to brutish beasts,
And men have lost their reason! Bear with me.
My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,
And I must pause till it come back to me.

85

90

92.

general coffers: public treasuries.

117.

dear abide it: pay heavily for it.

95

100

105

110

1st Citizen Methinks there is much reason in his
sayings.
2nd Citizen. If thou consider rightly of the matter,
Caesar has had great wrong.
3rd Citizen
Has he, masters?
I fear there will a worse come in his place.
4th Citizen Marked ye his words? He would not
take the crown;
Therefore ’tis certain he was not ambitious.
1st Citizen If it be found so, some will dear abide it.
2nd Citizen Poor soul! His eyes are red as fire
with weeping.

115

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 2

107

3rd Citizen There’s not a nobler man in Rome than
Antony.
4th Citizen Now mark him. He begins again to
speak.
Antony But yesterday the word of Caesar might
Have stood against the world. Now lies he there,
And none so poor to do him reverence
O masters! If I were disposed to stir
Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,
I should do Brutus wrong, and Cassius wrong,
Who, you all know, are honourable men.
I will not do them wrong. I rather choose
To wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you,
Than I will wrong such honourable men.
But here’s a parchment with the seal of Caesar.
I found it in his closet; ’tis his will.
Let but the commons hear this testament,
Which (pardon me) I do not mean to read,
And they would go and kiss dead Caesar’s wounds
And dip their napkins in his sacred blood;
Yea, beg a hair of him for memory,
And dying, mention it within their wills,
Bequeathing it as a rich legacy
Unto their issue.

120

123.

none so poor: none humble enough. Antony speaks
with heavy irony here — meaning, apparently you
are too great to show reverence for Caesar.

132.

closet: private chamber.

133.

commons: ordinary citizens.

125

130

testament: will.
135
136.

napkins: handkerchiefs.

144.

meet: proper, right.

153.

o’ershot: said too much.

140

4th Citizen We’ll hear the will! Read it, Mark
Antony.
All The will, the will! We will hear Caesar’s will!
Antony Have patience, gentle friends; I must not
read it.
It is not meet you know how Caesar loved you.
You are not wood, you are not stones, but men;
And being men, hearing the will of Caesar,
It will inflame you, it will make you mad.
’Tis good you know not that you are his heirs;
For if you should, O, what would come of it?
4th Citizen Read the will! We’ll hear it, Antony!
You shall read us the will, Caesar’s will!
Antony Will you be patient? Will you stay awhile?
I have o’ershot myself to tell you of it.

145

150

108

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 2

I fear I wrong the honourable men
Whose daggers have stabbed Caesar; I do fear it.
4th Citizen They were traitors. Honourable men!

155

All The will! The testament!
2nd Citizen They were villains, murderers! The
will! Read the will!
Antony You will compel me then to read the will?
Then make a ring about the corse of Caesar
And let me show you him that made the will.
Shall I descend? and will you give me leave?

160

All Come down.
2nd Citizen Descend.
3rd Citizen You shall have leave.

165

[ANTONY comes down.]
4th Citizen A ring! Stand round.
1st Citizen Stand from the hearse! Stand from
the body!

167.

hearse: bier; coffin.

172.

mantle: toga; cloak.

177.

rent: tear; hole.

181.

to be resolved: to make certain.

183.

angel: most favored companion.

185.

most unkindest: most unnatural; an emphatic
double superlative.

2nd Citizen Room for Antony, most noble Antony!
Antony Nay, press not so upon me. Stand far off.
All Stand back! Room! Bear back!
Antony If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
You all do know this mantle. I remember
The first time ever Caesar put it on.
’Twas on a summer’s evening in his tent.
That day he overcame the Nervii.
Look, in this place ran Cassius’ dagger through.
See what a rent the envious Casea made.
Through this the well beloved Brutus stabbed;
And as he plucked his cursed steel away,
Mark how the blood of Caesar followed it,
As rushing out of doors to be resolved
If Brutus so unkindly knocked or no;
For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar’s angel.
Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar loved him!
This was the most unkindest cut of all;
For when the noble Caesar saw him stab,

170

175

180

185

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Ingratitude, more strong than traitors’ arms,
Quite vanquished him. Then burst his mighty heart;
And in his mantle muffling up his face,
Even at the base of Pompey’s statue
(Which all the while ran blood) great Caesar fell.
O what a fall was there, my countrymen!
Then, and you, and all of us fell down,
Whilst bloody treason flourished over us.
O, now you weep, and I perceive you feel
The dint of pity. These are gracious drops.
Kind souls, what weep you when you but behold
Our Caesar’s vesture wounded? Look you here!
Here is himself, marred as you see with traitors.
1st Citizen O piteous spectacle!

Act III, Scene 2

109

190

195
196.

dint: impression, as in dent.
gracious: full of grace, honorable.

199.

marred: mutilated.

214.

private griefs: personal grievances. Antony suggests
that there may be some.

200

2nd Citizen O noble Caesar!
3rd Citizen O woeful day!
4th Citizen O traitors, villains!
1st Citizen O most bloody sight!
2nd Citizen We will be revenged.

205

All Revenge! About! Sneak! Burn! Fire!
Kill! Slay!
Let not a traitor live!
Antony Stay, countrymen.
1st Citizen Peace there! Hear the noble Antony.
2nd Citizen We’ll hear him, we’ll follow him, we’ll
die with him!
Antony Good friends, sweet friends, let me not
stir you up
To such a sudden flood of mutiny.
They that have done this deed are honourable.
What private griefs they have, alas, I know not,
That made them do it. They are wise and honourable,
And will no doubt with reasons answer you.
I came not, friends, to steal away your hearts.
I am no orator, as Brutus is,
But (as you know me all) a plain blunt man
That love my friend; and that they know full well

210

215

220

110

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 2

That gave me public leave to speak of him.
For I have neither writ, nor words, nor worth,
Action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech
To stir men’s blood. I only speak right on.
I tell you that which you yourselves do know,
Show you sweet Caesar’s wounds, poor poor dumb
mouths,
And bid them speak for me. But were I Brutus,
And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
Would ruffle up your spirits, and put a tongue
In every wound of Caesar that should move
The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.

221.

public . . . speak: leave to speak in public.

222.

writ: a speech prepared, or written out. Many editors print “wit.”

223.

Action: use of gesture.
utterance: verbal delivery.

225

229.

ruffle up: raise in anger, as a dog’s ruff.

243.

seventy-five drachmas: Today, about $30.

248.

his walks: see note at I.2.155.

251.

common pleasures: public gardens.

230

All We’ll mutiny.
1st Citizen

We’ll burn the house of Brutus.

3rd Citizen Away then! Come, seek the conspirators.
Antony Yet hear me, countrymen. Yet hear me
speak.
All Peace, ho! Hear Antony, most noble Antony!

235

Antony Why friends, you go to do you know not
what.
Wherein hath Caesar thus deserved your loves?
Alas, you know not! I must tell you then.
You have forgot the will I told you of.
All Most true! The will! Let’s stay and hear the
will.

240

Antony Here is the will, and under Caesar’s seal.
To every Roman citizen he gives,
To every several man, seventy-five drachmas.
2nd Citizen Most noble Caesar! We’ll revenge his
death.
3rd Citizen O royal Caesar!

245

Antony Hear me with patience.
All Peace, ho!
Antony Moreover he hath left you all his walks,
His private arbors, and new-planted orchards,
On this side Tiber; he hath left them you,
And to your heirs for ever — common pleasures,

250

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 2

111

To walk abroad and recreate yourselves.
Here was a Caesar! When comes such another?
1st Citizen Never, never! Come away, away!
We’ll burn his body in the holy place
And with the brands fire the traitors’ houses.
Take up the body.

255

255.

the holy place: among the sacred temples of Rome.

260

260.

forms: benches.

2nd Citizen Go fetch fire!
3rd Citizen Pluck down benches!
4th Citizen Pluck down forms, windows, anything!

windows: shutters.

[Exit citizens with the body.]
Antony Now let it work. Mischief, thou art afoot,
Take thou what course thou wilt.
[Enter servant.]
How now, fellow?
Servant Sir, Octavia is already come to Rome.
Antony Where is he?
Servant He and Lepidus are at Caesar’s house.

265

Antony And thither will I straight to visit him.
He comes upon a wish. Fortune is merry,
And in this mood will give us anything.
Servant I heard him say Brutus and Cassius
Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.
Antony Belike they had some notice of the people,
How I had moved them. Bring me to Octavius. [Exeunt.]

270

267.

upon a wish: just as I wished it.

270.

Are rid: have ridden.

271.

notice: news. This comes from Antony as a grim
understatement.

112

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 2

COMMENTARY

istorically, Julius Caesar’s funeral took place
H
on March 20, five days after
his assassination. However,
Shakespeare has taken
dramatic license and compressed approximately six
weeks of events into a single scene that takes place
in the Forum. During the five
days between Caesar’s
death and his funeral, the
actual conspirators were
quick to place themselves
into positions of powers,
assigning
themselves
heads of provinces such as
Macedonia, Syria, and Asia
Minor.
Shakespeare’s version
of the story has the conspirators going directly to
the Forum to explain to the
angry crowd why they felt
it necessary to eliminate
Caesar. This scene is one
of the most brilliant examples in dramatic literature
of the power of words to
manipulate both intellect
and emotion. As planned,
Brutus is the first to speak.

Caesar’s Forum.
Ronald Sheridan/Ancient Art & Architecture Collection Ltd.

Brutus’ speech is written in simple, balanced prose,
a much more logical and straightforward style than that
of poetry. He begins by reminding the people that he is
an honorable man and assumes the crowd will make the
connection between an honorable man and an honorably motivated deed. Shakespeare creates rhythm in
Brutus’ speech through the use of parallelism (the repetition of words, phrases or sentences that have the
same grammatical structure). This rhetorical tool is used
to reinforce an idea or concept by making it memorable
to an audience, but Brutus weakens his case by relying
on merely technical tools to make his suit to the crowd.
Brutus’ speech is void of passion, appealing to the

crowd’s sense of reason and mistakenly deeming them
his intellectual equals. His questions to the crowd are
rhetorical in nature; thus, no answer is really expected.
Politicians and other orators often use rhetorical questioning to manipulate an audience into believing they
have made up their own minds about an issue when it
has actually already been decided for them. Rather than
aiming to reach the mob’s emotions on a personal level,
Brutus appeals to the abstract ideal of patriotism and
offers to sacrifice himself for Rome. The bottom line,
however, is that there is only one explanation offered to
justify the need for Caesar’s assassination: He was
ambitious. Brutus makes no attempt to explain in what
ways Caesar was ambitious but expects the crowd to
take him at his word because he is an honorable man.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 2

Again, Brutus demonstrates his almost absurd inability to read people and situations. He wants to believe
that the common people of Rome are all noble, moral
people with an unquestioning sense of patriotism but,
as seen in the opening scene of the play, that is not the
case. The commoners are often coarse, easily manipulated, and more interested in personal pleasures than
public politics. It is obvious that the crowd does not
grasp the reasoning behind the actions of the conspirators when they offer to crown Brutus, erect statues of
him, and declare, “Let him be Caesar.” Ironically, the
crowd seeks to replace Caesar with the man who killed
him; to create a new dictator from the one who
attempted to eliminate the previous one. Brutus, however, chooses to ignore the callings and, feeling he has
sufficiently convinced the crowd that the action of the
conspirators was necessary, confidently but naively,
leaves the pulpit to Antony. His trust in Antony is as misplaced as his trust in the mob before him.
The exact climax of Julius Caesar has been debated
for years. Some feel that the actual murder of Caesar is
the climax, whereas others contend that the turning
point occurs when Antony turns the crowd against the
conspirators. Obviously, the death of Caesar is a
moment of emotional intensity that could qualify as the
defining moment of the play, but the instant of greatest
intensity and suspense occurs when Antony stirs the
crowd to such frenzy that
the downfall of the conspirators becomes inevitable.
Antony claims not to be
a great orator, but his
funeral speech is three
times longer than the one
given by Brutus and will,
with its more emotionally
effective use of poetry,
move the people of Rome
to violent acts of rage. As
he begins to speak, Antony
has the difficult task of
commanding the attention
of a crowd set against his
purpose. He does this by
first addressing them as
friends and assuring them
that his only intention is to

113

bury Caesar. It is obvious from the next line of the
speech that Antony has listened carefully to Brutus’
speech and found the explanation of Caesar’s ambition
to be a weak one. He picks up on the word, and repeating it consistently, begins to prove the contrary. He also,
in keeping with the instructions Brutus has given him,
reminds the crowd that Brutus is an honorable man. By
alternating ironic references to Brutus’ honor and nobility with real evidence of Caesar’s lack of ambition,
Antony forces the crowd to understand the subtext of
his words without violating the conspirators’ instructions not to speak ill of them. Without violating the rules
established by Brutus, Antony destroys Brutus’ only
argument, that Caesar was ambitious.
Unlike Brutus’ speech, which seemed almost sterile,
planned, and memorized, Antony’s speech suggests a
more spontaneous approach, with attention being paid
to the effect his words are having on his audience.
When he suspects that he has completely undermined
Brutus’ singular argument that Caesar was ambitious,
Antony begins to weep openly for his fallen friend. A
man held in such high regard moves the crowd to
silence and sympathy at this public display of emotion.
Although Antony’s tears may have been shed to purposely sway the crowd to his purposes, his grief over
the loss of Caesar appears genuine and his feelings fuel
the speech and thus, enflame the crowd.

After Caesar’s assassination, Mark Antony rouses the mob with an impassioned eulogy.
Mary Evans Picture Library

114

Act III, Scene 2

Even though Antony has convinced the crowd that
Caesar was not ambitious and the conspirators are not
honorable men, he is not finished. If he is intent on letting “slip the dogs of war” he has more work to do. Historically, Antony, having convinced Calpurnia to give him
free access to all of Caesar’s papers, found Caesar’s will
the evening of the assassination. He intends to use it
now in an effort to manipulate the crowd by appealing
to its greedy nature. Having mentioned the will, the
crowd is, of course, filled with curiosity and the more
Antony declines to read the will the more insistent the
crowd becomes.
Antony’s next ploy to enrage the crowd draws on
sentimentality and the use of visual aids. Closing in on
Caesar’s body, Antony shows Caesar’s torn and bloody
robe to the awed crowd. He tells them that Caesar wore
that very cloak during the conquest of the Nervii and
that he remembers the first time Caesar put on the robe.
The Nervii was a very barbaric tribe living in Gaul but,

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar
considering that Antony did not join Caesar in Gaul until
three years after the defeat of the Nervii, it is highly
unlikely that he actually remembered that particular battle, much less that particular robe. He then goes on to
point out each tear in the mantle and identify the man
who made each particular rent. Because Trebonius had
taken Antony away from the Capitol before the assassination, making sure he was nowhere near, it is impossible for Antony to know such information. But he is not
questioned, and the crowd is enraptured by his every
word. Moving to the cut that he claims Brutus made,
Antony describes it as “the most unkindest cut of all.”
If, as Plutarch suggests, Brutus stabbed Caesar in the
genitals, this is perhaps the only accurate statement
Antony has made in the past few lines.
Before Brutus left the Capitol, having turned the body
of Caesar over to Antony, he had instructed Antony to
“prepare the body.” By that, Brutus meant for Antony to
bathe Caesar’s body, dress the wounds so they would
not seep, and wrap the body in a fresh shroud. But
Antony intentionally chose not to do this. He leaves Caesar’s body in the same condition that he found it, and he
now shows that pitiful sight to the crowd. In this highly
charged moment, the people of Rome are moved to
tears of rage and sorrow, but Antony is not yet quite satisfied with the crowd’s emotional intensity. Now is the
moment to remind the people of Caesar’s will and its
contents. Informing the crowd of Caesar’s generosity is
the explosive fuel that enflames the mob into the frenzy
that Antony desires.
The image of fire as both a means of destruction and
purification is powerfully intermingled in the violence
and chaos unleashed in the final part of this scene. As
Caesar’s body is being sanctified through the ritual of
cremation, the crowd takes firebrands from the funeral
pyre to burn down the homes of the conspirators. Brutus and Cassius, along with the other conspirators, are
forced to escape from Rome, the city they had desired
to free.
Antony’s actions of turning the mob into a violent,
murderous force have often been criticized. But are his
actions any worse than those of the treasonous and
murdering conspirators?

Mark Antony’s funeral speech over the body of Caesar.
Mary Evans Picture Library

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III,
Scene 3

Act III, Scene 3

115

Cinna the poet, encountering the hysterical mob, is mistaken for Cinna the
conspirator and is murdered.

ACT III, SCENE 3
Rome, a street.

NOTES

[Enter CINNA, the Poet, and after him the citizens.]
Cinna I dreamt to-night that I did feast with
Caesar,
And things unluckily charge my fantasy.
I have no will to wander forth of doors,
Yet something leads me forth.
1st Citizen What is your name?

1.

to-night: last night.

2.

things . . . fantasy: i.e., what has happened to Caesar makes me imagine I may share his fate (“feast”).

5

2nd Citizen Whither are you going?
3rd Citizen Where do you dwell?
4th Citizen Are you a married man or a bachelor?
2nd Citizen Answer every man directly.
1st Citizen Ay, and briefly.

10

4th Citizen Ay, and wisely.
3rd Citizen Ay, and truly, you were best.
Cinna What is my name? Whither am I going?
Where do I dwell? Am I a married man or a
bachelor? Then, to answer every man directly and
briefly, wisely and truly: wisely I say, I am a
bachelor.
2nd Citizen That’s as much as to say they are
fools that marry. You’ll bear me a bang for that,
I fear. Proceed directly.
Cinna Directly I am going to Caesar’s funeral.
1st Citizen As a friend or an enemy?
Cinna As a friend.

15

19.
20

bear me a bang: get a beating from me.

116

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act III, Scene 3

2nd Citizen That matter is answered directly.
4th Citizen For your dwelling — briefly.

25

Cinna Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol.
3rd Citizen Your name, sir, truly.
Cinna Truly, my name is Cinna.
1st Citizen Tear him to pieces! He’s a conspirator.
Cinna I am Cinna the poet! I am Cinna the poet!

30

4th Citizen Tear him for his bad verses! Tear
him for his bad verses!
Cinna I am not Cinna the conspirator.
4th Citizen It is no matter; his name’s Cinna!
Pluck but his name out of his heart, and turn him
going.
3rd Citizen Tear him, tear him! [They kill him.]
Come, brands ho! firebrands! To Brutus’, to
Cassius’! Burn all! Some to Decius’ house and some
to Casca’s; some to Ligarius’! Away, go!

35

35.

turn him going: send him on his way.

40

[Exeunt citizens with the body of Cinna.]
COMMENTARY

he crowd, enflamed by Antony’s passionate speech,
is out of control and looking for revenge. The mob
T
mentality that overpowers and replaces individual logic
takes hold of the Roman people and the poet, Helvius
Cinna, no relation to Cinna the conspirator, is one of the
doomed innocents to be victimized by the unthinking
mass. In a scene taken from the works of Plutarch, the
crowd confronts the poet and demands to know his
name. When told his name is Cinna, the mob disregards
his cries that he is not the conspirator of the same
name, and proceeds to tear the unfortunate poet to bits.

smell as sweet.” In Act I of Julius Caesar, Cassius questions why Caesar’s name should be sounded with more
power than Brutus’. In this scene, Cinna is killed
because of his name. The label or image assigned to
something has become more important than the person
or object being named. The word “peace” can be
shouted over the mangled body of a slain leader, Portia
can maim her leg in an effort to live up to her father’s
name, and the crowds are content to let Brutus be
“Caesar.” The name, not the reality of what is beneath
it, takes on almost mythical proportions.

In addition to showing the consequences of a violent
and bloodthirsty mob, Shakespeare might have chosen
this particular episode from Plutarch to illustrate other
points as well. An issue that turns up in many of Shakespeare’s plays is the importance of a name. In Romeo
and Juliet for example, Juliet asks, “What’s in a name?
That which we call a rose / By any other word would

In times of civil unrest, truth seems to lose its importance and reality becomes relative to the perceiver. As
people who use words to uncover truth, poets have no
place in this world of chaos. It is symbolic perhaps that
Cinna the poet, the seeker of truth, is murdered rather
than Cinna the politician, who uses words to hide the
truth.

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

CLIFFSCOMPLETE

JULIUS CAESAR

ACT IV
Scene 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
Scene 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
Scene 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127

Poet For shame, you generals! What do you mean?
Love and be friends, as two such men should be;
For I have seen more years, I’m sure, than ye.
Cassius Ha ha! How vilely doth this cynic rhyme!
Brutus Get you hence, sirrah! Saucy fellow, hence!
Cassius Bear with him, Brutus. ’Tis his fashion.
Brutus I’ll know his humour when he knows his time.
What should the wars do with these jigging fools?

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act IV,
Scene 1

Act IV, Scene 1

121

Antony and Octavius have formed the second Triumvirate with Lepidus.
The three men are discussing who among their enemies should be
eliminated and how they can cheat the people of Rome from the
inheritance left to them in Caesar’s will. Antony informs Octavius that
Brutus and Cassius are forming their armies and that it is time for them to
prepare for war.

ACT IV, SCENE 1
Rome, a room in Antony’s house.

NOTES

[Enter ANTONY, OCTAVIUS, and LEPIDUS.]
Antony These many, then, shall die; their names
are pricked.
Octavius Your brother too must die. Consent you,
Lepidus?
Lepidus I do consent —
Octavius

Prick him down, Antony.

Lepidus Upon condition Publius shall not live,
Who is your sister’s son, Mark Antony.

5

Antony He shall not live. Look, with a spot I
damn him.
But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar’s house.
Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine
How to cut off some charge in legacies.
Lepidus What, shall I find you here?

6.

spot: mark (made by Antony on the list).

9.

cut . . . legacies: i.e., cut down the payment promised to the people in Caesar’s will.

10

Octavius Or here or at the Capitol. [Exit LEPIDUS.]
Antony This is a slight unmeritable man,
Meet to be sent on errands. Is it fit,
The threefold world divided, he should stand
One of the three to share it?
Octavius
So you thought him,
And took his voice who should be pricked to die
In our black sentence and proscription.
Antony Octavius, I have seen more days than you;
And though we lay these honours on this man

12.

slight unmeritable: of no merit.

14.

the threefold world divided: the division of the
Roman Empire into Europe, Africa, and Asia.

17.

black sentence: i.e., death sentence.

15

proscription: list of those proscribed, or condemned.

122

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act IV, Scene 1

To ease ourselves of divers sland’rous loads,
He shall but bear them as the ass bears gold,
To groan and sweat under the business,
Either led or driven as we point the way;
And having brought our treasure where we will,
Then take we down his load, and turn him off
(Like to the empty ass) to shake his ears
And graze in commons.

20

20.

To . . . loads: to rid ourselves of the burden of
slander, i.e., Lepidus is to take the blame for
some of their actions.

26.

empty: unburdened.

27.

in commons: on the public pasture.

30.

appoint: provide.

25

Octavius
You may do your will;
But he’s a tried and valiant soldier.
Antony So is my horse, Octavius, and for that
I do appoint him store of provender.
It is a creature that I teach to fight,
To wind, to stop, to run directly on,
His corporal motion governed by my spirit.
And, in some taste, is Lepidus but so.
He must be taught, and trained, and bid go forth:
A barren-spirited fellow; one that feeds
On objects, arts, and imitations
Which, out of use and staled by other men,
Begin his fashion. Do not talk of him
But as a property. And now, Octavius,
Listen great things. Brutus and Cassius
Are levying powers. We must straight make head.
Therefore let our alliance be combined,
Our best friends made, or means stretched;
And let us presently go sit in council
How covert matters may be best disclosed
And open perils surest answered.
Octavius Let us do so; for we are at the stake
And bayed about with many enemies;
And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear,
Millions of mischiefs. [Exeunt.]

30

store: a supply.
provender: food

35

32.

wind: turn.

33.

corporal motion: the movement of his body.

34.

taste: measure or degree.

36.

barren-spirited: dull, lacking spirit.

36–37.

feeds . . . imitations: i.e., enjoys curiosities (curious objects), artificialities, and fashions. Some
editors read “abject orts” (abandoned scraps).

38.

staled: having been made stale.

39.

Begin his fashion: are newly fashionable to him.

40.

property: thing or possession.

42.

make head: raise an army.

43.

combined: strengthened.

44.

stretched: used as fully as possible.

46.

covert . . . disclosed: how secret matters may be
discovered and dealt with.

48.

at the stake: the image is from the Elizabethan
sport of bear-baiting. The bear was tied to a stake
and “bayed” about with dogs.

51.

mischiefs: hostile thoughts/harms or evils. The
word carried a stronger meaning for the Elizabethans than it does for us.

40

45

50

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act IV, Scene 1

123

COMMENTARY

lthough it seems that little time has passed between
the end of Act III and the beginning of Act IV, the
A
actual time between Caesar’s funeral and the forming
of the Second Triumvirate was over a year and a half. In
that time, Antony failed to win over the Senate and was
defeated by Decius Brutus’ army in Gaul. While Antony
was away from Rome, Octavius Caesar convinced the
Senate to recognize him as Caesar’s rightful heir and
had Mark Antony declared a public enemy. In the meantime, while Antony and Octavius were at odds with each
other, Brutus and Cassius gathered their forces and
amassed their power over the eastern portion of the
Roman republic.
Knowing that it was possible for Rome to fall into the
hands of the conspirators if Antony and Octavius continued to oppose each other, Marcus Aemilius Lepidus,
a Roman general, successfully attempted to reconcile
the two men. In November of 43 B.C., the three men met
in Bononia and reached an agreement to form the Second Triumvirate, a three-man government comprised of
Antony, Octavius, and Lepidus.
Act IV opens on an horrific note as Antony, Octavius,
and Lepidus casually assemble a list of men who are to
die. The list includes not only enemies of the triumvirate
but friends and family members as well. The three men
bargain with each other, offering the death of a nephew
for the death of a brother. This gruesome game clearly
illustrates the viciousness and atrocities created by illmanaged insurrection.
Motivated by his obsession to revenge Caesar’s
death, Antony’s savage and unscrupulous character is
further revealed as the scene progresses. In his passionate funeral speech, Antony used Caesar’s will to
enflame the crowd to do his bidding. Now, he looks for
ways to cheat those same people of their legacies. From
his comments concerning Lepidus, it becomes clear
that Antony uses and manipulates people as easily as
he used and manipulated words in his funeral oration.
Antony’s regard for humanity, except in terms of property and serviceability, is nonexistent.

Mark Antony.
Ronald Sheridan/Ancient Art & Architecture Collection Ltd.

This scene becomes a fascinating parallel to Act II,
Scene 1, in which the conspirators also have a conversation about who should live or die. In contrast to the
quick and ruthless manner of the triumvirate in choosing those to eliminate, the ineffectual, almost illogical
manner used by the conspirators in discussing Antony’s
fate begins to look nearly noble. Although possibly
spurred by jealousy in Cassius or a misplaced sense of
honor in Brutus, the bottom line for the conspirators’
attack on Caesar was for the betterment of their beloved
Rome. This scene provides a sharp contrast between
the motivations of Brutus and Cassius and those of
Antony and Octavius and clearly illustrates that compared to the new triumvirate, Caesar was a rather harmless tyrant.

124

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act IV, Scene 2

Act IV,
Scene 2

Brutus, camping with his army in Sardis, has sent for Cassius. Brutus’
servant informs Brutus that Cassius has received him in a polite but
distant manner. When Cassius arrives, it is obvious that the friendship
between the two men is strained and they move into Brutus’ tent to
discuss matters further.

ACT IV, SCENE 2.
Before Brutus’ tent near Sardis.

NOTES

[Drum. Enter BRUTUS, LUCILIUS, LUCIUS, and the army.
TITINIUS and PINDARUS meet them.]

S.D.

Brutus Stand ho!

the army: on the Elizabethan stage, the army
would have consisted of a few actors with
swords following the leaders.

Lucilius Give the word, ho! and stand!
Brutus What now, Lucilius? Is Cassius near?
Lucilius He is at hand, and Pindarus is come
To do you salutation from his master.
Brutus He greets me well. Your master, Pindarus,
In his own change, or by ill officers,
Hath given me some worthy cause to wish
Things done undone; but if he be at hand,
I shall be satisfied.

10

Pindarus
I do not doubt
But that my noble master will appear
Such as he is, full of regard and honour.
Brutus He is not doubted. A word, Lucilius,
How he received you. Let me be resolved.
Lucilius With courtesy and with respect enough,
But not with such familiar instances
Nor with such free and friendly conference
As he hath used of old.
Brutus
Thou hast described
A hot friend cooling. Ever note, Lucilius,
When love begins to sicken and decay
It useth an enforced ceremony.
There are no tricks in plain and simple faith;
But hollow men, like horses hot at hand,
Make gallant show and promise of their mettle;
[Low march within.]

4.

Pindarus: accented on the first syllable.

6.

greets me well: i.e., with a worthy representative. It has been pointed out that Brutus is always
courteous to his subordinates.

7.

In . . . officers: i.e., either through a change in himself, or through the fault of his officers.

8.

worthy: justifiable.

5

10.

satisfied: have things explained to my satisfaction.

12.

regard: respect.

13.

A word: i.e., fell me.

14.

resolved: fully informed.

16.

familiar instances: signs of familiarity or
friendship.

17.

conference: talk.

21.

enforced ceremony: forced politeness.

23.

hollow . . . hand: insincere men, like horses who
are eager at first.

S.D.

The “march” was generally a drum offstage,
and a “low march” a drum beaten softly to
indicate that the approaching army was still at
some distance.

15

20

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

But when they should endure the bloody spur,
They fall their crests, and like deceitful jades
Sink in the trial. Comes his army on?
Lucilius They mean this night in Sardis to be
quartered.
The greater part, the horse in general,
Are come with Cassius.

Act IV, Scene 2

25
26.

fall their crests: lower their manes.
jades: worthless horses.

27.

Sink . . . trial: fail in the test.

29.

horse in general: the cavalry.

31.

gently: slowly.

40.

sober form: restrained manner.

41.

content: calm.

42.

griefs: grievances.

46.

enlarge: give free expression to.

48.

charges: troops.

30

Brutus
Hark! He is arrived.
March gently on to meet him.
[Enter CASSIUS and his powers.]
Cassius Stand ho!
Brutus Stand ho! and speak the word along.
1st Soldier Stand!
2nd Soldier Stand!

35

3rd Soldier Stand!
Cassius Most noble brother, you have done me
wrong.
Brutus Judge me, you gods! wrong I mine
enemies?
And if not so, how should I wrong a brother?
Cassius Brutus, this sober form of yours hides
wrongs;
And when you do them —
Brutus
Cassius, be content.
Speak your griefs softly. I do know you well.
Before the eyes of both our armies here
(Which should perceive nothing but love from us)
Let us not wrangle. Bid them move away.
Then in my tent, Cassius, enlarge your griefs,
And I will give you audience.

40

45

Cassius
Pindarus,
Bid our commanders lead their charges off
A little from this ground.
Brutus Lucilius, do you the like; and let no man
Come to our tent till we have done our conference.
Let Lucius and Titinius guard our door. [Exeunt.]

50

125

126

Act IV, Scene 2

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

COMMENTARY

or the first time in the play, the location shifts from
Rome to Sardis, the capital of Lydia, a kingdom in
F
Asia Minor. Again, Shakespeare seems to draw a comparison between the forces of Antony and Octavius and
Brutus and Cassius. Although there is evidence of
power struggles beginning between Antony and
Octavius in the previous scene, the two men remain
united in their purposes. This scene clearly establishes
the fact that the relationship between Brutus and Cassius has seriously deteriorated, reflecting a larger picture of discord within the republican cause.
The issue of friendship that pervades Julius Caesar
is especially evident in this scene and the next. The
word “love” and its variants occurs fifty-six times in
the course of the play and here Brutus discloses that
his friendship with Cassius is “cooling” and the love
that had once been between them has begun to
“sicken and decay.” The breech between the two men
is a direct result of the conflict between the realist and
the idealist. Even in the horrific aftermath of the assassination, Brutus has not lost his naivete, and his personal principles still take precedence over his personal
relationships.
Brutus’ preoccupation with how situations appear to
others is obviously still of great concern to him. When
Cassius publicly accuses Brutus of wrongdoing, Brutus

cuts him off and admonishes him for speaking so candidly before the armies. That the morale of the troops
could be adversely affected by witnessing an argument
between the two leaders is obvious, but it is also likely
that Brutus would not want to be seen as out of control
or have his faults recounted in a public setting. The fiery
and passionate Cassius continues to subordinate himself to Brutus. At Brutus’ request, Cassius subdues himself and the two men move within Brutus’ tent to
continue airing their frustrations.
In the 1623 Folio, there is no division between Scenes
2 and 3 in Act IV. The separation of the two scenes was
actually executed by Alexander Pope in his edition of
the plays published in the early 1700s. Pope’s rationale
for dividing the two scenes was that Brutus and Cassius
move from one place to another. Because there were
no major scenery changes possible on the stage of the
Globe Theatre and there has been no evidence of tents
set up on the stage as in Richard III, it is most likely that
the other characters listed in the stage directions
merely left the stage, leaving Brutus and Cassius alone
to continue the scene. However, the majority of modern
editors have retained the division of the two scenes.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act IV,
Scene 3

Act IV, Scene 3

127

Brutus accuses Cassius of accepting bribes and the quarrel between the
two men escalates until both men realize the futility of their anger. Brutus
tells Cassius that Portia has committed suicide and the men make plans
for the forthcoming war with Antony and Octavius. After the men leave
Brutus’ tent, Brutus is visited by the ghost of Caesar who tells Brutus he
will see him at Philippi.

ACT IV, SCENE 3.
Within Brutus’ tent.

NOTES

[Enter BRUTUS and CASSIUS.]
Cassius That you have wronged me doth appear in
this:
You have condemned and noted Lucius Pella
For taking bribes here of the Sardians;
Wherein my letters, praying on his side,
Because I knew the man, was slighted off.

noted: publicly disgraced.

4.

letters: in Shakespeare’s writing, the word is often
singular in meaning.

5.

slighted off: contemptuously dismissed.

8.

nice . . . comment: trivial error should be criticized.

5

Brutus You wronged yourself to write in such a case.
Cassius In such a time as this it is not meet
That every nice offence should bear his comment.
Brutus Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself
Are much condemned to have an itching palm,
To sell and mart your offices for gold
To undeservers.

2.

10

10.

itching palm: avid desire for money

11.

mart your offices: i.e., make bargains or profits
because of your powers.

16.

chastisement doth therefore hide his head: legal
authority afraid to act because of Cassius’ influence.

23.

supporting robbers: i.e., for supporting those who
would rob Romans of their liberties.

Cassius
I an itching palm?
You know that you are Brutus that speaks this,
Or by the gods, this speech were else your last!
Brutus The name of Cassius honours this corruption,
And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.

15

Cassius. Chastisement?
Brutus. Remember March; the ides of March
remember.
Did not great Julius bleed for justice sake?
What villain touched his body that did stab
And not for justice? What, shall one of us,
That struck the foremost man of all this world
But for supporting robbers — shall we now
Contaminate our fingers with base bribes,

20

128

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act IV, Scene 3

And sell the mighty space of our large honours
For so much trash as may be grasped thus?
I had rather be a dog and bay the moon
Than such a Roman.
Cassius
Brutus, bait not me!
I’ll not endure it. You forget yourself
To hedge me in. I am a soldier, I,
Older in practice, abler than yourself
To make conditions.
Brutus

25

30

25.

the . . . honours: i.e., the great scope we have in
conferring honors.

26.

grasped thus: implied stage direction. The grasp
shows act of greed.

27.

dog and bay at the moon: proverbial for something wasted or useless.

28.

bait: tempt to violence.

30.

hedge me in: restrict me.

31.

practice: experience.

32.

make conditions: to decide matters.

37.

slight: worthless.

Go to! You are not, Cassius.

Cassius I am.
Brutus I say you are not.
Cassius Urge me no more! I shall forget myself.
Have mind upon your health. Tempt me no further.

35

Brutus Away, slight man!
Cassius Is’t possible?
Brutus
Hear me, for I will speak.
Must I give way and room to your rash choler?
Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?

39.

way . . . choler: scope to your anger.

40

40.

stares: glares or glowers with anger.

45

45.

crouch: bow.

46.

testy humour: irritable temper.

47.

digest . . . spleen: swallow the poison of your
anger. The spleen was thought to be the source
of anger.

52.

vaunting: boasting.

54.

learn of: both (1) discover the existence of, and
(2) learn a lesson from.

Cassius O ye gods, ye gods! Must I endure all this?
Brutus All this! Aye, more. Fret till your proud
heart break.
Go show your slaves how choleric you are
And make your bondmen tremble. Must I budge?
Must I observe you? Must I stand and crouch
Under your testy humour? By the gods,
You shall digest the venom of your spleen,
Though it do split you; for from this day forth
I’ll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter,
When you are waspish.
Cassius

50

Is it come to this?

Brutus You say you are a better soldier.
Let it appear so; make your vaunting true,
And it shall please me well. For mine own part,
I shall be glad to learn of noble men.
Cassius You wrong me every way! You wrong me,
Brutus!

55

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act IV, Scene 3

I said an elder soldier, not a better.
Did I say ‘better’?
Brutus

If you did, I care not.

Cassius When Caesar lived he durst not thus have
moved me.
Brutus Peace, peace! You durst not so have
tempted him.

58.

moved: angered.

75

75.

indirection: dishonest dealing.

80

80.

rascal counters: cheap coins.

85

85.

rived: split in two.

60

Cassius I durst not?
Brutus No.
Cassius What, durst not tempt him?
Brutus

For your life, you durst not.

Cassius Do not presume too much upon my love.
I may do that I shall be sorry for.
Brutus You have done that you should be sorry
for.
There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats;
For I am armed so strong in honesty
That they pass by me as the idle wind,
Which I respect not. I did send to you
For certain sums of gold, which you denied me;
For I can raise no money by vile means.
By heaven, I had rather coin my heart
And drop my blood for drachmas than to wring
From the hard hands of peasant their vile trash
By any indirection. I did send
To you for gold to pay my legions,
Which you denied me. Was that done like Cassius?
Should I have answered Caius Cassius so?
When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous
To lock such rascal counters from his friends,
Be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts,
Dash him to pieces!
Cassius

65

70

I denied you not.

Brutus You did.
Cassius I did not. He was but a fool that brought
My answer back. Brutus hath rived my heart.
A friend should bear his friend’s infirmities,

129

130

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act IV, Scene 3

But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.
Brutus I do not, till you practise them on me.
Cassius You love me not.
Brutus

I do not like your faults.

Cassius A friendly eye could never see such faults.

90

Brutus A flatterer’s would not, though they do
appear
As high as huge Olympus.
Cassius Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come!
Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius.
For Cassius is aweary of the world:
Hated by one he loves; braved by his brother;
Checked like a bondman; all his faults observed,
Set in a notebook, learned and conned by rote
To cast into my teeth. O, could weep
My spirit from mine eyes! There is my dagger,
And here my naked breast; within, a heart
Dearer than Pluto’s mine, richer than gold.
If that thou be’st a Roman, take it forth.
I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart.
Strike as thou didst at Caesar; for I know,
When thou didst hate him worst, thou lovedst him
better
Than ever thou lovedst Cassius.
Brutus
Sheathe your dagger.
Be angry when you will; it shall have scope.
Do what you will; dishonour shall be humour
O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb
That carries anger as the flint bears fire;
Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark,
And straight is cold again.
Cassius
Hath Cassius lived
To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus
When grief and blood ill-tempered vexeth him?
Brutus When I spoke that, I was ill-tempered too.
Cassius Do you confess so much? Give me your
hand.
Brutus And my heart too.

95
96.

braved: defied.

97.

checked like a bondman: scolded like a slave.

98.

conned by rote: learned by heart.

102.

Cassius (and Shakespeare) may have here confused Pluto, the god of the underworld, and Plutus, the god of wealth.

108.

scope: freedom.

109.

dishonour . . . humour: i.e., I shall take any insult
as an effect of your mood.

112.

much enforced: violently or repeatedly struck.

115.

blood ill-tempered: unbalanced emotion.

100

105

110

115

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Cassius
Brutus

Act IV, Scene 3

131

O Brutus!
What’s the matter?

Cassius Have you not love enough to bear with me
When that rash humour which my mother gave me
Makes me forgetful?

120.

rash . . . me: i.e., the quick temper I inherited from
my mother.

Cassius Ha ha! How vilely doth this cynic rhyme!

133.

Brutus Get you hence, sirrah! Saucy fellow,
hence!

cynic: ill-mannered fellow, with special reference to
the philosophical school of Cynics who were generally critical of anyone else’s behavior.

134.

Saucy: insolent.

136.

I’ll . . . time: i.e., I’ll attend to him when he chooses
the proper time to speak to me.

137.

jigging: here rhyming, contemptuously or empty and
vulgar.

138.

Companion: a contemptuous form of address.

120

Brutus
Yes, Cassius; and from henceforth,
When you are over-earnest with your Brutus,
He’ll think your mother chides, and leave you so.
[Enter a poet, followed by LUCILIUS, TITINIUS, and
LUCIUS.]
Poet Let me go in to see the generals!
There is some grudge between ’em. ’Tis not meet
They be alone.

125

Lucilius You shall not come to them.
Poet Nothing but death shall stay me.
Cassius How now? What’s the matter?
Poet For shame, you generals! What do you mean?
Love and be friends, as two such men should be;
For I have seen more years, I’m sure, than ye.

Cassius Bear with him, Brutus. ’Tis his fashion.

130

135

Brutus I’ll know his humour when he knows his
time.
What should the wars do with these jigging fools?
Companion, hence!
Cassius

Away, away, be gone!

[Exit poet.]
Brutus Lucilius and Titinius, bid the commanders
Prepare to lodge their companies to-night.
Cassius And come yourselves, and bring Messala
with you
Immediately to us. [Exeunt LUCIUS and TITINIUS.]
Brutus

Lucius, a bowl of wine.

140

132

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act IV, Scene 3

[Exit LUCIUS.]
Cassius I did not think you could have been so
angry.
Brutus O Cassius, I am sick of many griefs.
Cassius Of your philosophy you make no use
If you give place to accidental evils.

145
146.

accidental evils: evils that come by chance.

150.

crossed: opposed.

151.

touching: grievous. The word was stronger for the
Elizabethans than it is for us.

152.

Upon: as a result of.

154–155.

for . . . came: i.e., the news of their strength and
her death came together.

155.

distract: out of her mind.

156.

swallowed fire: the detail is from Plutarch, who
says she cast hot burning coals into her mouth
and she choked herself.

159.

unkindness: enmity.

165.

call . . . necessities: examine our needs.

Brutus No man bears sorrow better. Portia is dead.
Cassius Ha! Portia?
Brutus She is dead.
Cassius How scaped I killing when I crossed
you so?
O insupportable and touching loss!
Upon what sickness?
Brutus
Impatient of my absence,
And grief that young Octavius with Mark Antony
Have made themselves so strong; for with her
death
That tidings came. With this she fell distract,
And (her attendants absent) swallowed fire.

150

155

Cassius And died so?
Brutus

Even so.

Cassius

O ye immortal gods!

[Enter LUCIUS with wine and tapers.]
Brutus Speak no more of her. Give me a bowl of
wine. [Drinks.]
In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius.
Cassius My heart is thirsty for that noble pledge.
Fill, Lucius, till the wine o’erswell the cup.
I cannot drink too much of Brutus’ love.

160

[Drinks. Exit LUCIUS.]
[Enter TITINIUS and MESSALA.]
Brutus Come in, Titinius! Welcome, good Messala.
Now sit we close about this taper here
And call in question our necessities.
Cassius Portia, art thou gone?

165

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act IV, Scene 3

Brutus
No more, I pray you.
Messala, I have here received letters
That young Octavius and Mark Antony
Come down upon us with a mighty power,
Bending their expedition toward Philippi.

133

170

Messala Myself have letters of the selfsame tenure.

171.

tenture: meaning, information.

Brutus With what addition?

172.

addition?: i.e., with anything else?

Messala That by proscription and bills of outlawry
Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus
Have put to death an hundred senators.

173.

proscription: sentence of death.
bills of outlawry: i.e., lists of those outlawed.

175

Brutus Therein our letters do not well agree.
Mine speak of seventy senators that died
By their proscriptions, Cicero being one.
Cassius Cicero one?
Messala
Cicero is dead,
And by that order of proscription.
Had you your letters from your wife, my lord?

180

Brutus No, Messala.
Messala Nor nothing in your letters writ of her?
Brutus Nothing, Messala.
Messala

That methinks is strange.

Brutus Why ask you? Hear you aught of her in
yours?

185

Messala No, my lord.
Brutus Now as you are a Roman, tell me true.
Messala Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell;
For certain she is dead, and by strange manner.
Brutus Why, farewell, Portia. We must die,
Messala.
With meditating that she must die once,
I have the patience to endure it now.

190

191.

once: at some time.

194.

in art: in knowledge (of the Stoic philosophy).

195.

my nature: i.e., my natural emotions or instincts.

Messala Even so great men great losses should
endure.
Cassius I have as much of this in art as you,
But yet my nature could not bear it so.

195

134

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act IV, Scene 3

Brutus Well, to our work alive. What do you think
Of marching to Philippi presently?

196.

alive: which concerns the living.

197.

presently: at once.

201.

offence: damage.

205.

a forced affection: loyalty compelled by force.

208.

By them: by enlisting them.

209.

new added: with new additions.

214.

tried . . . of: tested thoroughly.

220.

Omitted: missed, not taken.

224.

ventures: investments in a voyage; the sailing
metaphor is continued.

228.

niggard: be stingy with or satisfy reluctantly.

Cassius I do not think it good.
Brutus

Your reason?

Cassius
This it is:
’Tis better that the enemy seek us.
So shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers,
Doing himself offence, whilst we, lying still,
Are full of rest, defence, and nimbleness.
Brutus Good reasons must of force give place to
better.
The people ’twixt Philippi and this ground
Do stand but in a forced affection;
For they have grudged us contribution.
The enemy, marching along by them,
By them shall make a fuller number up,
Come on refreshed, new added, and encouraged;
From which advantage shall we cut him off
If at Philippi we do face him there,
These people at our back.
Cassius

200

205

210

Hear me, good brother.

Brutus Under your pardon. You must note beside
That we have tried the utmost of our friends,
Our legions are brimful, our cause is ripe.
The enemy increaseth every day;
We, at the height, are ready to decline.
There is a tide in the affairs of men
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
On such a full sea are we now afloat,
And we must take the current when it serves
Or lose our ventures.
Cassius
Then, with your will, go on.
We’ll along ourselves, and meet them at Philippi.
Brutus The deep of night is crept upon our talk
And nature must obey necessity,
Which we will niggard with a little rest.
There is no more to say?

215

220

225

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act IV, Scene 3

Cassius
No more. Good night.
Early to-morrow will we rise and hence.

230

135

230.

hence: leave.

239.

instrument: in most productions Lucius plays a lute.

241.

knave: boy (affectionate).

Brutus Lucius! [Enter LUCIUS.] My gown. [Exit LUCIUS.]
Farewell good Messala.
Good night, Titinius. Noble, noble Cassius,
Good night and good repose.
Cassius
O my dear brother,
This was an ill beginning of the night!
Never come such division ’tween our souls!
Let it not, Brutus.

235

[Enter LUCIUS with the gown.]
Brutus

Everything is well.

Cassius Good night, my lord.
Brutus

Good night, good brother.

Titinius, Messala
Brutus

Good night, Lord Brutus.
Farewell every one.

[Exeunt CASSIUS, TITINIUS, and MESSALA.]
Give me my gown. Where is thy instrument?
Lucius Here in the tent.

240

Brutus
What, thou speak’st drowsily?
Poor knave, I blame thee not; thou art o’erwatched.
Call Claudius and some other of my men;
I’ll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.

o’erwatched: tired with watching or being on duty.

Lucius Varro and Claudius!
[Enter VARRO and CLAUDIUS.]
Varro Calls my lord?

245

Brutus I pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep.
It may be I shall raise you by and by
On business to my brother Cassius.
Varro So please you, we will stand and watch
your pleasure.
Brutus I will not have it so. Lie down, good sirs.
It may be I shall otherwise bethink me.
[VARRO and CLAUDIUS lie down.]
Look, Lucius, here’s the book I sought for so;
I put it in the pocket of my gown.

249.

stand . . . pleasure: stand by and await your
commands.

251.

otherwise bethink me: change my mind.

250

136

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act IV, Scene 3

Lucius I was sure your lordship did not give it me.
Brutus Bear with me, good boy, I am much forgetful.
Canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile,
And touch thy instrument a strain or two?

255

Lucius Ay, my lord, an’t please you.
Brutus
It does, my boy.
I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.
Lucius It is my duty, sir.

260

Brutus I should not urge thy duty past thy might.
I know young bloods look for a time of rest.

261.

might: strength.

262.

young bloods: young constitutions.

S.D.

The song usually sung on the stage at this point
is “Orpheus with his lute,” from Henry VIII. Queen
Katherine asks for it in that play when she “grows
sad with troubles,” and it is suitably melancholy.
Another appropriate Elizabethan song that has
been suggested for Lucius is John Dowland’s
“Come, Heavy Sleep.”

267.

murd’rous: resembling death in its effect.

268.

mace: Morpheus, Greek god of Dreams carried a
leaden staff that caused sleep.

275.

How ill this taper burns: common superstition.
Lights burned blue or dim in the presence of a
ghost.

277.

apparition: ghost.

278.

upon: toward.

Lucius I have slept, my lord, already.
Brutus It was well done; and thou shalt sleep again;
I will not hold thee long. If I do live,
I will be good to thee.
[Music, and a song. LUCIUS falls asleep.]
This is a sleepy tune. O murd’rous slumber!
Layest thou thy leaden mace upon my boy,
That plays thee music? Gentle knave, good night.
I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee.
If thou dost nod, thou break’st thy instrument;
I’ll take it from thee; and, good boy, good night.
Let me see, let me see. Is not the leaf turned down
Where I left reading? Here it is, I think.
[Enter the ghost of CAESAR.]
How ill this taper burns! Ha! who comes here?
I think it is the weakness of mine eyes
That shapes this monstrous apparition.
It comes upon me. Art thou any thing?
Art thou some god, some angel, or some devil
That mak’st my blood cold, and my hair to stare?
Speak to me what thou art.
Ghost Thy evil spirit, Brutus.
Brutus

Why com’st thou?

Ghost To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi.
Brutus Well; then I shall see thee again?

265

270

275

thing: i.e., material, physical thing.

280
280.

stare: stand up with fear. Cf. Macbeth V.4.10–13:
The time has been my senses would have cooled
To hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair
Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir
As life were in ‘t.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act IV, Scene 3

Ghost Ay, at Philippi.

285

Brutus Why, I will see thee at Philippi then.
[Exit GHOST.]
Now I have taken heart thou vanishest.
Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee.
Boy! Lucius! Varro! Sirs! Awake!
Claudius!

290

Lucius The strings, my lord, are false.

291.

false: out of tune.

307.

betimes: early in the morning, before me.

Brutus He thinks he still is at his instrument.
Lucius, awake!
Lucius My lord?
Brutus Didst thou dream, Lucius, that thou so
criest out?

295

Lucius My lord, I do not know that I did cry.
Brutus Yes, that thou didst. Didst thou see
anything?
Lucius Nothing, my lord.
Brutus To sleep again, Lucius. Sirrah Claudius!
[to VARRO] Fellow thou, awake!

300

Varro My lord?
Claudius My lord?
Brutus Why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?
Both Did we, my lord?
Brutus Ay. Saw you anything?
Varro No, my lord, I saw nothing.
Claudius

305

Nor I, my lord.

Brutus Go and commend me to my brother Cassius.
Bid him set on his powers betimes before,
And we will follow.
Both

It shall be done, my lord [Exeunt.]

137

138

Act IV, Scene 3

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

COMMENTARY

he quarrel between Brutus and Cassius is a very
short episode in Plutarch’s version of the Life of BruT
tus, but Shakespeare clearly understood the dramatic
potential in the argument and turned it into one of the
most highly acclaimed scenes in all of his plays. The
poet Leonard Digges, in a poem included in the Introduction to the 1623 First Folio, mentions the “parlying
Romans” and in a longer version of the poem printed in
the 1640 edition of Shakespeare’s Poems writes:
So have I seene, when Cesar would
appeare,
And on the Stage at half-sword parley
were,
Brutus and Cassius: Oh how the Audience,
Were ravish’d, with what wonder they
went thence. . . .
Even in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
when the play Julius Caesar was considered by many
critics one of Shakespeare’s lesser plays, the quarrel
scene between Brutus and Cassius was thought to be
a shining example of Shakespeare’s better work.
Samuel Johnson, who did not like the play, called the
scene one to be “universally celebrated,” and the poet
Samuel Taylor Coleridge cited the scene as evidence of
Shakespeare’s “genius being superhuman.”
The inevitable clash between Cassius’ cynical realism and Brutus’ stubborn idealism not only makes for
excellent drama but also brings to light the larger issues
of morality and ethics within rebellion. Cassius is well
aware that it takes money to maintain an army and it is
not always possible to obtain the needed funds in honorable ways. Cassius sees nothing wrong, under the
circumstances, with doing whatever is necessary,
including overlooking a “nice offence” such as bribery,
to secure the money needed to support the men in his
army. Instead of viewing Cassius’ fundraising activities
as necessary evils in a time of war, Brutus, impaired by
the blinders of nobility, can only see it as corruption.
Later in the scene, Brutus, having just condemned Cassius for obtaining money through extortion, now castigates Cassius for not sharing with him the spoils of his
efforts. Ironically, Brutus, accusing Cassius of contaminating “our fingers with base bribes,” fails to recognize

his own participation in corruption when he insisted the
conspirators contaminate their fingers with the blood of
the murdered Caesar.
In lines 38–47, Brutus accuses Cassius of being
“choleric.” Elizabethans believed that emotional stability along with general health depended on a proper balance of four fluids or humours within the body. The four
cardinal humours were blood, phlegm, choler (yellow
bile), and melancholy (black bile), and it was thought
that the mixtures of these elements would determine a
person’s temperament. A well-proportioned mixture of
all four elements would result in a person who was balanced and healthy. However, a person with a predominance of one fluid produced someone who was either
sanguine, phlegmatic, choleric, or melancholic. The
choleric man, or Cassius in Brutus’ opinion, would have
been quick to anger, lean, arrogant, ambitious, malicious, and sly.
The argument between the two men disintegrates
into an almost pathetic childlike squabble. For the
moment, Brutus replaces his stoic nature with one of
petulance and becomes a man who torments, intimidates, and belittles the man he calls a friend. Cassius
questions Brutus’ definition of friendship and suggests
that a true friend would not chronicle every fault of that
friend only to later “cast” every mistake “into my teeth.”
Brutus’ arrogance becomes so exaggerated that his
declarations become reminiscent of the ones spoken by
Caesar right before his death. Just as Caesar referred
to himself in terms of an Olympian god in Act III, Brutus,
using the same term, takes on the identical tones of
pomposity and conceit. Shakespeare continues to draw
a parallel between Brutus and Caesar and, at this point,
it would be difficult to distinguish one man from the
other.
Just as he exposed his chest to the storm in Act I,
Cassius now offers his “naked breast” to Brutus’ dagger. Just as he bears his chest, Cassius is a man who
openly bears his soul. Unlike Brutus, Cassius cannot
hide his feelings behind a philosophy. He is “aweary of
the world,” and his exhaustion comes not only from the
efforts on behalf of freedom for Rome but also from constantly trying to prove his love to Brutus. On every occasion, he has foresworn his own better judgment in an

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar
effort to placate Brutus. He has done the dirty work
required to keep their armies intact and now, Brutus can
do nothing but condemn and accuse and place himself
above Cassius, declaring superiority both ethically and
morally. As the quarrel comes to an end, the once passionate Cassius now appears beaten and forlorn but, as
is expected, it is Cassius who swallows his pride and
instigates the reconciliation between the two men.
The entrance of the poet into the scene at this
moment is more than an episode of comic relief.
According to Plutarch, the poet who entered the fray
was a cynic philosopher by the name of Marcus Phaonius, but if the actor playing the poet was, as is often
speculated, William Shakespeare himself, the scene
takes on a more complex meaning. As evidenced in Act
III, poets do not prosper in times of civil unrest. Cinna
was torn limb from limb and, although this poet walks
away with his life, he is insulted and harshly dismissed.
The message brought by the poet to the two generals is
a simple but powerful one: “Love and be friends.” The
job of the poet is to uncover truth and beauty, and the
truth revealed in this short scene is the importance of
love: love between friends, love of country, love of
proper ideals. Since the funeral speech, no one has
mentioned the love of Rome or the love of freedom. Love
between individuals has been replaced with ambition
and petty concerns and, as a result, the world is at odds
and on the brink of destruction. Instead of listening to
the poet however, Brutus labels him an empty, vulgar
fool and ignores the most important theme presented in
the play: “to love and be friends.”
Following the exit of the poet, Brutus reveals that his
wife, Portia, has died. According to Plutarch, Portia
killed herself by putting hot coals in her mouth, but
Shakespeare’s description of “swallowing fire”
enforces the continuing imagery of destruction by fire.
Brutus’ stoicism is no more evident than in the telling of
his wife’s death, but it is possible that his sorrow and
grief was the cause of his uncharacteristic show of
emotion as he quarreled with Cassius.
Almost as soon as Brutus has told Cassius of Portia’s
death, Messala enters to report the news of Portia’s
death to Brutus. The retelling of the information seems
an almost unnecessary detail within the scene. Many
scholars speculate that Shakespeare revised the play,
writing the first telling of Portia’s death (lines 147–156)

Act IV, Scene 3

139

to replace the second (lines 179–192) in an attempt to
avoid making Brutus look totally emotionless, but the
printer failed to delete the second passage.
Closer examination, however, might point to the second telling as a way of further revealing Brutus’ character. Messala enters the scene accompanied by
Titinius. Cassius, still in shock over Portia’s demise, verbally laments her death but is quieted by Brutus with,
“No more, I pray you.” Brutus goes on to deny having
any news of Portia, after just telling Cassius of her death
and, when Messala tells him of her death, Brutus’
response is calm to the point of uncaring. Brutus,
always concerned with his public image, could have put
on this show of stoic resignation to impress Messala,
knowing that word of his response would spread
through the camp and, indeed, Messala calls Brutus a
great man. By this point, Shakespeare has so merged
the characters of Brutus and Caesar that Brutus’ words,
rather than being just reminiscent of Caesar’s words,
begin to echo exact thoughts. For example, in Act II,
Caesar remarks that “death, a necessary end, / Will
come when it will come.” Brutus in Act IV declares,
“We must die, Messala. / With meditating that she must
die once, / I have the patience to endure it now.” The
retelling of Portia’s death, rather than being a compositor’s error, allows Shakespeare to continue to thematically metamorphose the two men into one.
Messala also brings the news of the deaths of the
senators proscribed by Antony and Octavius. Although
Messala reports the death of 100 senators, Brutus has
heard of only 70. Again, confusion reigns in war and
within the ranks of Brutus’ and Cassius’ armies. Messala also tells of the death of Cicero. Marc Antony
ordered the death of Cicero and, even though Cicero
had been one of Octavius’ few early supporters,
Octavius agreed to list Cicero for death. Knowing he
was marked for death, Cicero tried to escape from Italy
but the ship in which he was sailing was blown back to
shore. Instead of making another attempt to escape,
Cicero waited for the soldiers sent to kill him and without further resistance, died at their hands in December
of 43 B.C.
The next order of business is the discussion of military strategy. Because Antony and Octavius are known
to be advancing towards Phillipi, Brutus suggests that
they march their own armies to meet them there.

140

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act IV, Scene 3

Cassius, the more experienced soldier, disagrees, arguing logically that if they stay where they are, their soldiers will be rested and better able to do battle. Brutus’
ever expanding ego intervenes and he vetoes Cassius’
idea saying, “Good reasons must of force give place to
better.” Brutus behaves dictatorially and his brazen
over-confidence makes it more and more difficult to differentiate between the tyranny of the dead Caesar and
the tyranny of the living Brutus. Cassius makes a very
feeble attempt to speak further on the matter but Brutus refuses to listen. Instead, he emotes on the importance of acting when the moment is right. Ironically, of
course, Brutus has yet to ever act at the proper time and
Shakespeare’s theory holds true that time, and Brutus’
relationship to it, remains out of kilter. Brutus himself
has become an anachronism.

the fact that the ghost identifies itself as evil would be
proof that Brutus is, at least subconsciously, aware that
the murder of Caesar and the ensuing chaos was
immoral. The second interpretation of Caesar’s ghost
would be as an actual apparition. Both the Romans and
the Elizabethans were superstitious people who
unequivocally believed in the existence of ghosts. Either
interpretation, however, serves to show that Brutus, like
Caesar before his death, has become superstitious. It is
a fulfillment of Antony’s prophecy that Caesar’s spirit
has “come hot from hell” and it foreshadows the defeat
of the republican forces and the death of Brutus at
Phillipi.

After everyone leaves the tent, Brutus dons his nightgown and literally transforms himself from his public
image into his private self. As with Portia in Act II, when
Brutus drops the mask of the stoic politician he
becomes a caring, concerned man who can admit mistakes and find humor in his situation. In this very short
segment of almost domestic bliss, it becomes obvious
that Brutus was much more suited for the pleasures of
the home than the perils of politics. In a very real sense,
he seems to be a man forced into a role he was not
made to play.
Into this short-lived moment of peace comes the
ghost of Julius Caesar. The episode, rather than being
an invention of Shakespeare’s dramatic imagination, is
actually taken from Plutarch’s record of events. In his
accounting, Plutarch relates that the ghost identified
itself as Brutus’ “evil spirit.” There are at least two possible ways of interpreting the appearance of Caesar’s
ghost. The first would be to portray the ghost as the
manifestation of Brutus’ troubled mind and guilty conscience. Brutus is exhausted by his angry episode with
Cassius and full of grief over the death of Portia. The
recent deaths of the senators, the inevitable deaths that
will occur in the upcoming battles, and the possibility of
his own death cannot be far from Brutus’ thoughts. If
the ghost were the outward form of Brutus’ conscience,

Julius Caesar.
Mary Evans Picture Library

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

CLIFFSCOMPLETE

JULIUS CAESAR

ACT V
Scene 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
Scene 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
Scene 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
Scene 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158
Scene 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160

Brutus O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet!
Thy spirit walks abroad and turns our swords
In our own proper entrails.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act V,
Scene 1

Act V, Scene 1

145

Antony and Octavius and Brutus and Cassius prepare for battle. Brutus
and Cassius, feeling that they may lose the war, say their good-byes.

ACT V, SCENE 1
The Plain of Philippi.

NOTES

[Enter OCTAVIUS, ANTONY, and their army.]
Octavius Now, Antony, our hopes are answered.
You said the enemy would not come down
But keep the hills and upper regions.
It proves not so. Their battles are at hand;
They mean to warn us at Philippi here,
Answering before we do demand of them.
Antony Tut! I am in their bosoms and I know
Wherefore they do it. They could be content
To visit other places, and come down
With fearful bravery, thinking by this face
To fasten in our thoughts that they have courage.
But ’tis not so.

5

10

4.

battles: armies.

5.

warn: defy, oppose, challenge.

6.

Answering . . . them: attacking us before we attack
them.

7.

in their bosoms: either (1) I can read their thoughts,
or (2) my spies are among them.

8–9.

content . . . places: would rather be elsewhere.

10.

fearful bravery: a brave appearance hiding their fear.
face: show.

[Enter a messenger.]
Messenger
Prepare you, generals.
The enemy comes on in gallant show;
Their bloody sign of battle is hung out,
And something to be done immediately.

13.

gallant show: splendid array.

14.

bloody sign: red flag. Shakespeare uses this elsewhere as a sign of battle.

16.

softly: slowly.

19.

exigent: emergency.

Brutus They stand and would have parley.

21.

parley: conversation.

Cassius Stand fast, Titinius. We must out and talk.

22.

Stand fast: hold your forces here.

15

Antony Octavius, lead your battle softly on
Upon the left hand of the even field.
Octavius Upon the right hand. Keep thou the left.
Antony Why do you cross me in this exigent?
20
Octavius I do not cross you; but I will do so.
[March. Drum. Enter BRUTUS, CASSIUS, and their army,
LUCILIUS, TITINIUS, and others.]

Octavius Mark Antony, shall we give sign of
battle ?

out: go forward.

146

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act V, Scene 1

Antony No, Caesar, we will answer on their charge.
Make forth. The generals would have some words.

25

24.

answer charge: attack when they do.

25.

Make forth: i.e., let us go forward.

33.

posture: form or shape.

34.

Hybla bees: the bees of Mt. Hybla, in Sicily, were
famous for their honey. Cassius refers to the
honey of Antony’s eloquence in his funeral
oration.

48.

the cause: i.e., to the business at hand.

49.

proof: trial in battle.

52.

goes up: is sheathed.

Octavius Stir not until the signal.
Brutus Words before blows. Is it so, countrymen?
Octavius Not that we love words better, as you do.
Brutus Good words are better than bad strokes,
Octavius.
Antony In your bad strokes, Brutus, you give good
words;
Witness the hole you made in Caesar’s heart,
Crying ‘Long live! Hail, Caesar!’
Cassius
Antony,
The posture of your blows are yet unknown;
But for your words, they rob the Hybla bees,
And leave them honeyless.
Antony

30

35

Not stingless too.

Brutus O yes, and soundless too!
For you have stol’n their buzzing, Antony,
And very wisely threat before you sting.
Antony Villains! you did not so when your vile
daggers
Hacked one another in the sides of Caesar.
You showed your teeth like apes, and fawned like
hounds,
And bowed like bondmen, kissing Caesar’s feet;
Whilst damned Casca, like a cur, behind
Struck Caesar on the neck. O you flatterers!
Cassius Flatterers? Now Brutus, thank yourself!
This tongue had not offended so to-day
If Cassius might have ruled.
Octavius Come, come, the cause! If arguing make
us sweat,
The proof of it will turn to redder drops
Look,
I draw a sword against conspirators.
When think you that the sword goes up again?
Never, till Caesar’s three-and-thirty wounds

40

45

50

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act V, Scene 1

Be well avenged, or till another Caesar
Have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.

55

147

54.

another Caesar: i.e., Octavius himself.

55.

Have added slaughter: has also been killed by.

59.

strain: family.

61.

schoolboy: Octavius was 21 years old.

62.

masker and reveller: the “gamesome” quality in
Antony that has been referred to at l.2.203–4 and
II.2.116. The Elizabethan “mask” or masque was an
elaborate theatrical entertainment fashionable at
court. This is another example of the minor anachronisms that gave to the ancient Rome of this play a
contemporaneous, Elizabethan quality.

66.

stomachs: appetite for battle; courage.

67.

bark: a ship.

68.

on the hazard: at stake.

72.

as: as on (understood).

75.

As Pompey was: Pompey was persuaded against his
judgment to fight Caesar at Pharsalia, and was
defeated.

77.

held Epicurus strong: Epicurus was a Greek philosopher; as a believer in his teachings, Cassius could
not have admitted the evidence of portents or
omens.

79.

presage: predict.

80.

former ensign: foremost standard or banner.

Brutus Caesar, thou canst not die by traitors’
hands
Unless thou bring’st them with thee.
Octavius
So I hope.
I was not born to die on Brutus’ sword.
Brutus O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,
Young man, thou couldst not die more honourable.

60

Cassius A peevish schoolboy, worthless of such
honour,
Joined with a masker and a reveller!
Antony Old Cassius still.
Octavius
Come, Antony, away!
Defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth.
If you dare fight to-day, come to the fields;
If not, when you have stomachs.

65

[Exeunt OCTAVIUS, ANTONY, and army.]
Cassius Why now blow wind, swell billow, and
swim bark!
The storm is up, and all is on the hazard.
Brutus Ho, Lucilius! Hark, a word with you.
Lucilius

My lord?

70

[BRUTUS and LUCILIUS talk apart.]
Cassius Messala.
Messala

What says my general?

Cassius
Messala,
This is my birthday; as this very day
Was Cassius born. Give me thy hand, Messala.
Be thou my witness that against my will
(As Pompey was) am I compelled to set
Upon one battle all our liberties.
You know that I held Epicurus strong
And his opinion. Now I change my mind
And partly credit things that do presage.
Coming from Sardis, on our former ensign

75

80

148

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act V, Scene 1

Two mighty eagles fell; and there they perched,
Gorging and feeding from our soldiers’ hands,
Who to Philippi here consorted us.
This morning they are fled away and gone,
And in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites
Fly o’er our heads and downward look on us
As we were sickly prey. Their shadows seem
A canopy most fatal, under which
Our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.

83.

consorted us: accompanied us.

85.

ravens, crows, and kites: birds proverbially associated with death,

87.

sickly: sickening, about to die.

Cassius
I but believe it partly;
For I am fresh of spirit and resolved
To meet all perils very constantly.

92.

constantly: with fortitude.

Brutus Even so Lucilius.

93.

Even so Lucilius: Brutus finishes the conversation
he has been having, aside, with Lucilius.

97.

Let’s reason with: let’s examine.

101.

that philosophy: the Stoic philosophy in which
suicide was considered cowardly.

102.

for Cato’s death see note at II.1.295.

105–106.

to prevent / The time of life: to anticipate the termination of life.

107.

To . . . providence: to await the judgment.

109.

led in triumph: led as a captive in the triumphal
procession.

Messala Believe not so.

Cassius
Now, most noble Brutus,
The gods to-day stand friendly, that we may,
Lovers in peace, lead on our days to age!
But since the affairs of men rest still uncertain,
Let’s reason with the worst that may befall.
If we do lose this battle, then is this
The very last time we shall speak together.
What are you then determined to do?
Brutus Even by the rule of that philosophy
By which I did blame Cato for the death
Which he did give himself — I know not how,
But I do find it cowardly and vile,
For fear of what might fall, so to prevent
The time of life — arming myself with patience
To stay the providence of some high powers
That govern us below.

85

90

95

100

105

Cassius
Then, if we lose this battle,
You are contented to be led in triumph
Through the streets of Rome?

110

Brutus No, Cassius, no. Think not, thou noble
Roman,
That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome.
He bears too great a mind. But this same day
Must end that work the ides of March begun,
And whether we shall meet again I know not.

115

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act V, Scene 1

149

Therefore our everlasting farewell take.
For ever and for ever farewell, Cassius!
If we do meet again, why, we shall smile;
If not, why then this parting was well made.
Cassius For ever and for ever farewell, Brutus!
If we do meet again, we’ll smile indeed;
If not, ’tis true this parting was well made.
Brutus Why then, lead on. O that a man might
know
The end of this day’s business ere it come!
But it sufficeth that the day will end,
And then the end is known. Come, ho! Away!

120

125

[Exeunt.]
COMMENTARY

fter the appearance of Ceasar’s ghost, Brutus commanded that the armies begin their march toward
A
Phillipi, a major city in the province of Macedonia,
located about ten miles north of the Aegean Sea. A
small skirmish had actually ensued between the opposing forces of Antony and Octavius and Brutus and Cassius before the battle in this scene takes place. The
result was that the armies of the conspiracy, although
outnumbered by Antony’s and Octavius’ army, had commandeered a strategically superior location. Positioned
high in the hills, Brutus and Cassius could have been
victorious by simply delaying any action while Antony
and Octavius’ armies tried to exist on the unprotected
and swampy plains of the area.
From Octavius’ first speech, it becomes clear that
Brutus and Cassius have made the characteristically
unwise decision to descend from the hills onto the
plains and Antony is amazed but thankful at the turn of
events. Antony believes that the conspirators are
attacking rather than waiting out the progression of
events so as not to look cowardly. Based on Antony’s
conjecture, and the previous examples of Brutus’ military acumen, it would not be too difficult to guess who
made the decision to move from the hills onto the plains
of Phillipi.

Antony gives Octavius orders to fight on the left side
of the field, and, in the first overt sign of dissension
between the two men, Octavius argues with Antony
insisting that he be the one to fight on the left side.
Octavius eventually concedes to Antony’s command to
fight on the left, but he warns Antony that in this matter,
“I do not cross you; but I will do so.” Indeed, Octavius
does keep his word and triumphs over Antony in Shakespeare’s telling of Antony and Cleopatra.
Brutus’ call for “Words before blows” is a tradition
more medieval than Roman; in medieval times, it was
customary to exchange insults before battle. The tradition allows Shakespeare to establish the animosity
between the two sides using verbal rather than physical combat. The task of producing a battle scene on a
small stage with a limited number of actors is always
difficult. By using verbal assault, rapid action, swift
scene changes, and one-on-one combat, Shakespeare
is able to create the illusion of a larger battle. The
exchange would also entertain an Elizabethan audience
with its quick and biting wit.
Octavius hurls threats and insults at Brutus and
Cassius and swears he was not meant to die upon Brutus’ sword. Brutus replies, “O, if thou wert the noblest

150

Act V, Scene 1

of thy strain, / Young man, thou couldst not die more
honourable.” Even in the face of battle and the very real
possibility of death, Brutus’ conceit is not humbled. Brutus has, in essence, become Caesar; and Octavius, no
longer being referred to as Octavius, has taken the name
of Caesar. Indeed, the spirit of Julius Caesar has
metaphorically possessed both men, and while his ghost
roams the fields of Philippi, Caesar’s influence is even
more powerful and efficacious in death than it was in life.
Cassius condemns Antony for being like a “peevish
school boy” and Antony replies, “Old Cassius still!”
However, unlike Brutus, whose character has remained
fairly static, Cassius has changed considerably throughout the course of the play. He is no longer the Cassius
of Act I. In the beginning, he was a Machiavellian-type
character who was able to deviously persuade Brutus
to join the conspiracy. Caesar saw him as a dangerous
man who observed too much and spent too much time
in thought. From his rather cold and calculating introduction, a shrewd but passionate man has emerged.
Cassius is a loyal man who treasures his friendships,
but because he underestimates his own worth, he, too,
often represses his better judgment — and with dire
consequences. As he witnesses the imminent failure of
the dreams of the conspiracy, Cassius, acknowledging
the part his abject silence has played, is consumed with
depression.
Throughout the entire play, Cassius consistently
bends to the will of Brutus. Watching the death and
destruction brought about by Brutus’ mistaken judgment
must have been very difficult for the more astute Cassius. In a moment of clarity, Cassius is able to observe
his own fatal flaw, the suppression of his wisdom to the
whims of Brutus, and he can no longer remain silent.
Possibly brought on by the stress of battle and a premonition of the inevitable outcome, Cassius finally

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar
releases his angry frustration asserting, “Now Brutus,
thank yourself! / This tongue had not offended so to-day
/ If Cassius might have ruled.”
As the two opposing forces disperse to begin the
battle, Cassius further reveals the many changes that
have taken place in his character. He confides to Messala evidence of his discontent with Brutus’ decisionmaking. For the first time, he publicly admits that he is
going into this battle against his will, and he fears that
the outcome will be devastation for the conspiracy. In
opposition to his earlier disbelief in signs and omens,
Cassius now dreads the possibly ominous portents of
this battle being fought on his birthday. He takes note
that the fall of the birds that had followed them to
Philippi might well be a sign of impending death. Shakespeare’s use of the imagery in the description of the
shadows cast by the birds as a “canopy most fatal”
foreshadows an apocalyptic ending. Cassius’ Epicurean
philosophy, the belief that the gods did not meddle in
human events, making signs and omens invalid, gives
way to a more Stoic position, and Cassius seems to
resign himself to his predestined fate.
Cassius is not the only one to change a long-held
belief. For Brutus, the idea of suicide is “cowardly and
vile” but when weighed in comparison to imprisonment
and public humiliation, Brutus swears he will opt for suicide. Again, his own self image is the reason behind his
decision. He tells Cassius that Brutus will never “go
bound to Rome. / He bears too great a mind.”
Both men, sensing their imminent death and the
defeat of the conspiracy, say their final good-byes.
Despite their differences, they shared a very intense
common experience, and they are bound together by
circumstance and friendship.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act V,
Scene 2

Act V, Scene 2

151

Antony fights with Cassius’ men while Octavius battles against the army
of Brutus.

ACT V, SCENE 2
The battlefield.

NOTES

[Alarum. Enter BRUTUS and MESSALA.]
Brutus Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these bills
Unto the legions on the other side. [Loud alarum.]
Let them set on at once; for I perceive
But cold demeanour in Octavius’ wing,
And sudden push gives them the overthrow.
Ride, ride, Messala! Let them all come down.
[Exeunt.]

S.D.

Alarum: a conventional signal, on either trumpets or
drums, summoning an army to battle.

1.

bills: orders.

2.

the other side: the other flank of the army, commanded by Cassius.

4.

cold demeanour: lack of fighting spirit.

5.

gives . . . overthrow: i.e., will overthrow them.

6.

Let . . . down: command the whole army to come
down from the heights.

5

COMMENTARY

he battle has begun. Brutus and his army face off
against Octavius and his army while Cassius and his
T
men fight against the forces of Antony. Brutus’ men
overpower Octavius’ men and Brutus sends word of the

victory to Cassius. However, instead of moving in to help
Cassius defeat Antony, Brutus’ men begin a premature
victory celebration.

152

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act V, Scene 3

Act V,
Scene 3

Cassius’ men begin to mutiny when defeat by Antony seems inevitable.
Cassius, seeing men storming his camps, sends Titinius to see if the men
are friend or foe. Pindarus, mistaking what he sees, tells Cassius that the
enemy has captured Titinius. Cassius, despondent over what he perceives
as the loss of Titinius and the loss of the war, commits suicide. Brutus
sees the body of Cassius and mourns the loss of his friend and prepares
for one last battle.

ACT V, SCENE 3
The battlefield.

NOTES

[Alarum. Enter CASSIUS and TITINIUS.]
Cassius O look, Titinius, look! The villains fly!
Myself have to mine own turned enemy.
This ensign here of mine was turning back;
I slew the coward and did take it from him.
Titinius O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early,
Who, having some advantage on Octavius,
Took it too eagerly. His soldiers fell to spoil,
Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.

5

1.

villains: i.e., his own men.

2.

to mine own: against my own (men).

3.

ensign: standard-bearer.

4.

it: i.e., the standard itself.

5.

the word: i.e., the word to attack.

7.

spoil: looting, pillage.

[Enter PINDARUS.]
Pindarus Fly further off, my lord! Fly further off!
Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord.
Fly therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off!

10

Cassius This hill is far enough. Look, look,
Titinius!
Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?
Titinius They are, my lord.
Cassius
Titinius, if thou lovest me,
Mount thou my horse and hide thy spurs in him
Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops
And here again, that I may rest assured
Whether yond troops are friend or enemy.

15

Titinius I will be here again even with a thought. [Exit.]
Cassius Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill.
My sight was ever thick. Regard Titinius,

20
21.

thick: dim, not clear.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act V, Scene 3

153

And tell me what thou not’st about the field.
[PINDARUS goes up.]
This day I breathed first. Time is come round,
And where I did begin, there shall I end.
My life is run his compass. Sirrah, what news?

S.D.

goes up: Pindarus leaves the main stage and reappears on the balcony, or upper stage, which then
represents “that hill.”

23.

breathed first: his birthday.

25.

compass: come full circle.

29.

make . . . spur: i.e., gallop toward him, spurring their
horses.

31.

light: dismount.

37.

Parthia: now Northern Iran.

38.

swore . . . life: i.e., I made you take an oath, as a
condition of letting you live.

42.

search: probe, pierce.

43.

Stand not: don’t delay.

51.

change: i.e., one thing for another.

25

Pindarus [Above.] O my lord!
Cassius What news?
Pindarus [Above.] Titinius is enclosed round about
With horsemen that make to him on the spur.
Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him.
Now Titinius! Now some light. O, he lights too!
He’s ta’en. [Shout.] And hark! They shout for joy.
Cassius Come down; behold no more.
O coward that I am to live so long
To see my best friend ta’en before my face!
[Enter PINDARUS from above.]
Come hither, sirrah.
In Parthia did I take thee prisoner;
And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,
That whatsoever I did bid thee do,
Thou shouldst attempt it. Come now, keep thine oath.
Now be a freeman, and with this good sword,
That ran through Caesar’s bowels, search this bosom.
Stand not to answer. Here, take thou the hilts;
And when my face is covered, as ’tis now,
Guide thou the sword. [PINDARUS stabs him.] Caesar
thou art revenged
Even with the sword that killed thee. [Dies.]
Pindarus. So, I am free; yet would not so have been,
Durst I have done my will. O Cassius!
Far from this country Pindarus shall run,
Where never Roman shall take note of him. [Exit.]

30

35

40

45

50

[Enter TITINIUS and MESSALA.]
Messala It is but change, Titinius for Octavius
Is overthrown by noble Brutus’ power,
As Cassius’ legions are by Antony.
Titinius These tidings will well comfort Cassius.

154

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act V, Scene 3

Messala Where did you leave him?

55

Titinius
All disconsolate,
With Pindarus his bondman, on this hill.
Messala Is not that he that lies upon the ground?
Titinius He lies not like the living. O my heart!
Messala Is not that he?
Titinius
No, this was he Messala,
But Cassius is no more. O setting sun,
As in thy red rays thou dost sink to night,
So in his red blood Cassius’ day is set!
The sun of Rome is set. Our day is gone;
Clouds, dews, and dangers come; our deeds are done!
Mistrust of my success hath done this deed.
Messala Mistrust of good success hath done this
deed.
O hateful Error, Melancholy’s child,
Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men
The things that are not? O Error, soon conceived,
Thou never com’st unto a happy birth,
But kill’st the mother that engendered thee!

60

65

65.

my success: the result of my mission.

67.

Melancholy’s child: i.e., those that are melancholy
are mistaken in their judgment.

68.

apt: ready to receive any impression.

71.

mother: i.e., the melancholy person who conceived the error.

82.

wreath: a laurel wreath.

70

Titinius What, Pindarus! Where art thou,
Pindarus?
Messala Seek him, Titinius whilst I go to meet
The noble Brutus, thrusting this report
Into his ears. I may say ‘thrusting’ it,
For piercing steel and darts envenomed
Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus
As tidings of this sight.

75

Titinius
Hie you, Messala,
And I will seek for Pindarus the while.
[Exit MESSALA.]
Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius?
Did I not meet thy friends, and did not they
Put on my brows this wreath of victory
And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their
shouts?

80

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act V, Scene 3

Alas, thou has misconstrued everything!
But hold thee, take this garland on thy brow.
Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I
Will do his bidding. Brutus, come apace
And see how I regarded Caius Cassius.
By your leave, gods, This is a Roman’s part.
Come, Cassius’ sword, and find Titinius’ heart.

155

84.

misconstrued: with the accent on the second syllable.

88.

regarded: honored.

89.

Titinius asks the gods to allow him to take his life
before the time they have allotted him.

85

90

part: role.

[Stabs himself and dies.]
[Alarum. Enter BRUTUS, MESSALA, YOUNG CATO,
STRATO, VOLUMNIUS, and LUCILIUS.]
Brutus Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie?
Messala Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it.
Brutus Titinius face is upward.
Cato

He is slain.

Brutus O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet!
Thy spirit walks abroad and turns our swords
In our own proper entrails. [Low alarums.]

95

Cato
Brave Titinius!
Look whe’r he have not crowned dead Cassius.
Brutus Are yet two Romans living such as these?
The last of all the Romans, fare thee well!
It is impossible that ever Rome
Should breed thy fellow. Friends, I owe moe tears
To this dead man than you shall see me pay.
I shall find time, Cassius; I shall find time.
Come therefore, and to Thasos send his body.
His funerals shall not be in our camps,
Lest it discomfort us. Lucilius, come;
And come, young Cato. Let us to the field.
Labeo and Flavius set our battles on
’Tis three o’clock; and, Romans, yet ere night
We shall try fortune in a second fight. [Exeunt.]

96.

own proper: very own.

97.

whe’r: whether.

101.

thy fellow: your equal.

100

moe: more.
104.

Thasos: an island near Philippi where Plutarch says
that Cassius was buried.

106.

discomfort us: dishearten our troops.

108.

battles: troops.

105

110

156

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act V, Scene 3

COMMENTARY

he last few moments of Cassius’ life are filled with
both irony and a sense of nobility. Ironically, his own
T
men are beginning to show signs of mutiny; Brutus has
again given bad military advice, ordering the attack too
early; and, instead of joining forces to help Cassius’
army defeat Antony, the honorable Brutus’ men have
begun to loot and pillage the enemy’s camp. Cassius,
faced with defeat and the continuing fatal mistakes of
his friend Brutus, does not back down. Instead, he has
rescued his battle flag and killed the coward who tried
to abscond with it. Even though Antony is moving closer
to Cassius’ position, he refuses to retreat any further,
and he mourns over what he perceives as the capture
of his “best friend.” Cassius’ final act before his death
is to offer freedom to his slave, Pindarus.

unnecessary mistake, but only in dying can Cassius
finally escape the bonds of Julius Caesar’s power.
Shakespeare again depicts the analogy between the
individual and the universe in Titinius’ final homage to
Cassius. The course of a man’s life is metaphorically
connected to the course of the sun in a single day, with
sunrise being birth and sunset being death. In this
speech, the images of the red rays of the sun, with a pun
on son, are symbolic of the red blood seeping from Cassius’ dying body. With Cassius’ death, night is come for
Rome and the ideals of freedom and liberty that he held
dear are thrown into darkness.

One of Cassius’ fatal flaws is revealed when he asks
Pindarus to relate to him what is happening to Titinius.
In an ironic twist, Cassius, who condemned Caesar
because of his physical ailments, reveals that his “sight
was ever thick.” Cassius’ shortsightedness has
metaphorically and now literally wreaked havoc
throughout the entire play. He has been unable to really
see what the people of Rome wanted in a leader. He
was blind to Brutus’ inability to lead the conspiracy, and
his blindness will now result in his own death.
Cassius, overcome with melancholy, seems
resigned to die, “this day I breathed first.” Unseeing or
misreading the chain of events, he does not wait for
confirmation of Titinius’ fate but rather asks Pindarus
to assist him in suicide. Early in the play, Cicero noted
that, “men may construe things after their own fashion” and now Titinius, almost echoing his words cries,
“Alas, thou hast misconstrued everything.” It is poetic
justice that Cassius is impaled with the very sword that
he used to kill Caesar and, as he dies, Cassius calls out
to Caesar, giving the impression that perhaps Brutus
is not the only member of the conspiracy who has been
haunted by the spirit of Caesar. Cassius’ death is an

Julius Caesar
Mary Evans Picture Library

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar
Titinius is devastated by the death of his friend Cassius. Feeling responsible for Cassius’ death, Titinius
feels that it was an act of courage to commit suicide
rather than live shamefully as the man who caused the
death of Cassius. Just like Antony who, proclaiming his
love and loyalty to his slain friend, asked to die with the
same sword and within the same hour as Caesar,
Titinius chooses to take his own life with Cassius’
sword.
Finding the bodies of Cassius and Titinius, Brutus
proclaims, “O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet! / Thy
spirit walks abroad and turns our swords / In our own
proper entrails.” Just as Antony prophesied in Act III,
Scene 1, “Caesar’s spirit, ranging for revenge, / With Ate
by his side” has “come hot from hell.”

Act V, Scene 3

157

Reclaiming his Stoic philosophy, Brutus covers up
any pain he may actually feel at the loss of Cassius. He
proclaims he will cry later and asks that the body not be
placed in the camp, lest it upset the troops. Having
quickly disposed of the issue of Cassius, Brutus, noting
the time as “three o’clock,” calls the troops together for
one last fight. Just moments before, Titinius had
remarked on the setting sun and the red rays of the
dying light, so, once again, Brutus has misjudged the
time as he drags the remains of his beaten army into the
final battle.

158

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act V, Scene 4

Act V,
Scene 4

Lucilius, pretending to be Brutus, is captured by Antony and his men.
Antony spares his life because of his loyalty to Brutus.

ACT V, SCENE 4
The battlefield.

NOTES

[Alarum. Enter BRUTUS, MESSALA, YOUNG CATO,
LUCILIUS, and FLAVIUS.]
Brutus Yet, countrymen, O yet hold up your heads!
[Exit BRUTUS, MESSALA, and FLAVIUS.]
Cato What bastard doth not? Who will go with me?
will proclaim my name about the field.
I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
A foe to tyrants, and my country’s friend.
I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!

What bastard: i.e., who is so low born that. . . .

4.

Cato: see note at II.1.295.

5

[Enter soldiers and fight.]
Lucilius And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus I!
Brutus, my country’s friend! Know me for Brutus!
[YOUNG CATO falls.]
O young and noble Cato, art thou down?
Why, now thou diest as bravely as Titinius,
And may’st be honoured, being Cato’s son.

2.

S.D.

The actors were accomplished fencers, and the
battles dramatically exciting. One of the few contemporary references to the play recalls how the
audience was “ravished” by the actors “on the
Stage at halfe-sword parley.”

7.

Plutarch says that Lucilius impersonated Brutus,
apparently in order to draw off the enemy.

10

1st Soldier Yield, or thou diest.
Lucilius
Only I yield to die.
There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight.
Kill Brutus, and be honoured in his death.
1st Soldier We must not. A noble prisoner!

15

[Enter ANTONY.]
2nd Soldier Room ho! Tell Antony Brutus is ta’en.
1st Soldier I’ll tell the news. Here comes the general.
Brutus is ta’en! Brutus is ta’en, my lord!
Antony Where is he?
Lucilius Safe, Antony; Brutus is safe enough.

20

12.

Only . . . die: I surrender only that I may die.

13.

so much: i.e.. Brutus’ power is such that he must
be killed at once.

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

I dare assure thee that no enemy
Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus.
The gods defend him from so great a shame!
When you do find him, or alive or dead,
He will be found like Brutus, like himself.
Antony This is not Brutus, friend; but, I assure you,
A prize no less in worth. Keep this man safe;
Give him all kindness. I had rather have
Such men my friends than enemies. Go on,
And see whe’r Brutus be alive or dead;
And bring us word unto Octavius’ tent
How every thing is chanced. [Exeunt.]

Act V, Scene 4

25

25.

like himself: true to himself.

32.

is chanced: has happened.

159

30

COMMENTARY

his scene should be played very quickly and with as
much commotion as possible. It is the final battle to
T
be fought before the war is brought to an end, and it
should illustrate the Republican commitment to the
cause but the futility of the attempt. The action also
shows a marked difference between the frenetic activity of Brutus’ men and the almost calm confidence of
Antony and his soldiers.
Despite the fact that Brutus’ decisions have been
directly responsible for the downfall of the conspiracy
and the death of many soldiers, Brutus’ men remain
loyal to him and to the cause of the Republic. Just as
Portia died trying to live up to the reputation of her

father, her younger brother, Marcus Cato, will also die
attempting to uphold the family name on behalf of Brutus. In another tactic taken from medieval tradition,
Lucilius, a decoy, pretends to be Brutus in an attempt to
protect the actual Brutus from being captured in battle.
Antony quickly recognizes that this man is not Brutus,
but instead of taking Lucilius prisoner, he commands his
soldiers to “keep this man safe.” Antony knows the fight
is all but over and that the death toll needs rise no
higher. Just as Caesar forgave many of the men who
fought with Pompey, Antony seems ready to do the
same.

160

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act V, Scene 5

Act V,
Scene 5

Brutus has lost the final battle. To avoid being taken prisoner, Brutus kills
himself and Caesar’s death is finally avenged. Antony delivers Brutus’
eulogy and in an effort to bring reconciliation to Rome, Octavius agrees to
pardon the remaining men in Brutus’ army.

ACT V, SCENE 5
The battlefield.

NOTES

[Enter BRUTUS, DARDANIUS, CLITUS, STRAW, and
VOLUMNIUS.]
Brutus Come, poor remains of friends, rest on this
rock.

1.

poor remains: pitiful remains.

Clitus Statilius showed the torchlight; but my lord,
He came not back. He is or ta’en or slain.

2.

the torchlight: a detail taken from Plutarch, who
recounts how a scout penetrated Cassius’ camp,
then occupied by Antony, and tried to signal to
Brutus’ forces.

13.

vessel: person, here imagined as filled with tears.

18.

several: separate.

Brutus Sit thee down, Clitus. Slaying is the word.
It is a deed in fashion. Hark thee, Clitus. [Whispers.]

5

Clitus What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world!
Brutus Peace then. No words.
Clitus

I’ll rather kill myself.

Brutus Hark thee, Dardanius. [Whispers.]
Dardanius

Shall I do such a deed?

Clitus O Dardanius!
Dardanius O Clitus!

10

Clitus What ill request did Brutus make to thee?
Dardanius To kill him, Clitus. Look, he meditates.
Clitus Now is that noble vessel full of grief,
That it runs over even at his eyes.
Brutus Come hither, good Volumnius. List a word.

15

Volumnius What says my lord?
Brutus
Why this, Volumnius.
The ghost of Caesar hath appeared to me
Two several times by night — at Sardis once,
And this last night here in Philippi fields.
I know my hour is come.
Volumnius

Not so, my lord.

20

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act V, Scene 5

Brutus Nay, I am sure it is, Volumnius.
Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes.
Our enemies have beat us to the pit.
[Low alarums.]
It is more worthy to leap in ourselves
Than tarry till they push us. Good Volumnius,
Thou know’st that we two went to school together.
Even for that our love of old, I prithee
Hold thou my sword-hilts whilst I run on it.

Brutus Farewell to you; and you; and you,
Volumnius.
Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep.
Farewell to thee too, Strato. Countrymen,
My heart doth joy that yet in all my life
I found no man but he was true to me.
I shall have glory by this losing day
More than Octavius and Mark Antony
By this vile conquest shall attain unto.
So fare you well at once; for Brutus’ tongue
Hath almost ended his life’s history.
Night hangs upon mine eyes; my bones would rest,
That have but laboured to attain this hour.
[Alarum. Cry within ‘Fly, fly, fly!’]

23.

to the pit: (1) a hole in which an animal is trapped,
(2) grave.

25

Volumnius That’s not an office for a friend, my
lord. [Alarums still.]
Clitus Fly, fly, my lord! There is no tarrying here.

29.

office: service.

S.D.

still: continuing, increasing in intensity.

39.

at once: all together.

42.

That . . . hour: the line may mean (1) I have striven
only to attain this honorable death, or (2) I have
experienced only pain in attaining my death.

45.

respect: repute.

46.

smatch: touch, smack, taste.

30

35

40

Clitus Fly, my lord, fly!
Brutus

Hence! I will follow.

[Exeunt CLITUS, DARDANIUS, and VOLUMNIUS.]
I prithee, Strato, stay thou by thy lord.
Thou art a fellow of a good respect;
Thy life hath had some smatch of honour in it.
Hold then my sword, and turn away thy face
While I do run upon it. Wilt thou, Strato?

45

Strato Give me your hand first. Fare you well,
my lord.
Brutus Farewell, good Strato. [Runs on his sword.]
Caesar, now be still.

161

50

162

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act V, Scene 5

I killed not thee with half so good a will. [Dies.]
[Alarum. Retreat. Enter OCTAVIUS, ANTONY, MESSALA,
LUCILIUS, and the army.]

S.D.

Retreat: sounded by the trumpets to signal the
end of a battle.

55.

make a fire: cremate.

56.

Brutus only overcame: only Brutus conquered
Brutus.

59.

Lucilius’ saying: at V.4.21–25.

60.

entertain: take them into my service.

62.

prefer: recommend.

67.

latest: last.

71–72.

general . . . all: i.e., with honorable motives, and
for the good of all Romans.

73.

gentle: in the old sense of noble.

73–74.

elements / So mixed: qualities so balanced.

76.

use: treat.

79.

ordered honourably: treated in an honorable
manner.

80.

field: those in the field of battle, the armies.

81.

part: share.

Octavius What man is that?
Messala My master’s man. Strato, where is thy master?
Strato Free from the bondage you are in Messala.
The conquerors can but make a fire of him;
For Brutus only overcame himself,
And no man else hath honour by his death.

55

Lucilius So Brutus should be found. I thank thee,
Brutus,
That thou hast proved Lucilius’ saying true.
Octavius All that served Brutus, I will entertain
them.
Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?

60

Strato Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you.
Octavius Do so, good Messala.
Messala How died my master, Strato?
Strato I held the sword, and he did run on it.

65

Messala Octavius, then take him to follow thee,
That did the latest service to my master.
Antony This was the noblest Roman of them all.
All the conspirators save only he
Did what they did in envy of great Caesar;
He only, in a general honest thought
And common good to all, made one of them.
His life was gentle, and the elements
So mixed in him that Nature might stand up
And say to all the world, ‘This was a man!’
Octavius According to his virtue let us use him,
With all respect and rites of burial.
Within my tent his bones to-night shall lie,
Most like a soldier, ordered honourably.
So call the field to rest, and let’s away
To part the glories of this happy day. [Exeunt.]

70

75

80

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Act V, Scene 5

163

COMMENTARY

he last battle is fought. The war is finished. Caesar’s
death is avenged. Despondent over lost causes and
T
lost friends, Brutus is a “vessel full of grief” whose stoicism no longer comforts him. Finally, Brutus has the
time to shed the tears he promised Cassius.
Brutus knows that his options at this point are limited and, as he promised earlier, he chooses to take his
own life rather than become a prisoner. Brutus has once
again been visited by the ghost of Caesar, and he interprets the second sighting as a sign that his “hour is
come.” With alarums sounding throughout the scene, a
sense of extreme urgency is felt. The arrival of Antony
and Octavius is imminent, and Brutus must act quickly
if he is to avoid imprisonment.

Brutus tells his “life’s history” as he would wish it to
read, full of nobility and valiant deeds, but the story history tells of his life is far different. Brutus dies not only a
victim of his own sword, but also a victim of his own
delusions.
In his eulogy over Brutus’ lifeless body, Antony
praises Brutus as “the noblest Roman of them all.”
Words spoken at funerals often ignore the bad and glorify the good, but the last time Antony spoke those
words, they were loaded with sarcasm and innuendo,
aimed at bringing about the death and destruction of the
very man lying before him. Does he now speak those
words with the same sarcasm or do his words ring with

Even in the face of death and defeat, Brutus is unable
to see the reality of his life: “My heart doth joy that yet
in all my life / I found no man but he was true to me.”
Brutus ignores the fact that Cassius manipulated him to
entice him to join the conspiracy and Antony undermined his funeral speech and turned all of Rome against
him. He also chooses to ignore that these men whom he
is asking to help him avoid imprisonment will, with the
exception of Strato, fail to do so, running away before
they, too, can be caught. Brutus fails to realize that, in
the course of this play, the only person who was ever
true to him was the man who pardoned him for his allegiance to Pompey and welcomed him with open arms
into his home and into his Senate. Julius Caesar, who
died under the weight of Brutus’ betrayal, was the only
man who Brutus could say was actually “true to me.”
To the very end of his life, Brutus is concerned with
how he will be perceived by the public after his death
and where he will be placed in the annals of history. He
tells his remaining soldiers, “I shall have glory by this losing day / More than Octavius and Mark Antony / By this
vile conquest shall attain unto.” His tone is almost boastful and his sense of self-importance sadly misguided. As
most men face the end of their lives, they review their
own actions and make amends for their own transgressions. Brutus, to the end, lives the unexamined life. He
labels Antony’s efforts to revenge the death of Caesar as
“vile” but he never displays any remorse for the part he
played in causing Caesar’s death nor does he accept his
share of the responsibility for the war that was waged
by Antony and Octavius. As he has done his entire life,

Julius Caesar.
Mary Evans Picture Library

164

Act V, Scene 5

truthfulness? Having successfully avenged Caesar’s
death, perhaps Antony realizes that it is time for Caesar’s spirit to rest. It is time for peace to return to Rome.
Antony is a politician as well as a soldier and must
understand that the only way to truly achieve that peace
is to honor and thus forgive (at least publicly) the fallen
leader of the conspiracy, paving the way for unity and
reconciliation in Rome.
Octavius gives the orders for Brutus’ burial, calls an
end to the war and sends everyone away, “To part the
glories of this happy day.” By ending Julius Caesar with
everyone exiting to tell their own version of the day’s
events, Shakespeare subtly underlines the way history

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar
is often retold to suit the teller. In Shakespeare’s time,
the Tudor family from which Elizabeth I descended had
almost completely rewritten the history of the Plantagenets, the family that ruled England before them, and
this theme of history rewritten runs throughout many of
Shakespeare’s history plays, including Henry V and
Richard III.
Octavius speaks the last words of the play and, in
doing so, establishes himself as the dominant figure of
authority in the new regime. This new Caesar will
become a powerful force in Rome, and his story continues in Shakespeare’s telling of Antony and Cleopatra.

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Julius Caesar

CLIFFSCOMPLETE REVIEW
Use this CliffsComplete Review to gauge what you’ve
learned and to build confidence in your understanding of the original text. After you work through
the review questions, the problem-solving exercises,
and the suggested activities, you’re well on your way
to understanding and appreciating the works of
William Shakespeare.

IDENTIFY THE QUOTATION
Identify the following quotations by answering these
questions:
* Who is the speaker of the quote?
* What does it reveal about the speaker’s
character?
* What does it tell us about other characters within
the play?
* Where does it occur within the play?
* What does it show us about the themes of the
play?
* What significant imagery do you see in the quote,
and how do these images relate to the overall
imagery of the play?
1. Men at some time are masters of their fates.

The fault dear Brutus, is not in our stars
But in ourselves, that we are underlings.
2. Let me have men about me that are fat,

Sleek-headed men, and such as sleep o’ nights.
Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look.
He thinks too much. Such men are dangerous.

3. When beggars die there are no comets seen;

The heavens themselves blaze forth the death
of princes.
4. Cowards die many times before their deaths;

The valiant never taste of death but once.
5. But I am as constant as the Northern Star,

Of whose true-fixed and resting quality
There is no fellow in the firmament.
6. Cry ‘havoc’ and let slip the dogs of war.
7. This was the most unkindest cut of all.
8. There is a tide in the affairs of men

Which taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
9. O Julius Caesar; thou art mighty yet!

Thy spirit walks abroad and turns our swords
In our own proper entrails.
10. This was the noblest Roman of them all.

TRUE/FALSE
1. T F

The Feast of the Lupercal takes place on
the Ides of March.

2. T F

Cassius views the Roman people as
mindless sheep.

168

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

3. T F

Cassius uses flattery to persuade Brutus
to join the conspiracy.

4. T F

Cassius threatens to kill himself if Caesar is crowned king.

5. T F

Brutus insists that Antony should be
murdered along with Caesar.

6. T F

Brutus assures Portia that he will reveal
all of his secrets to her.

7. T F

Calpurnia and Decius agree that her
dream about Caesar is a bad omen.

8. T F

Artemidorus pleads to join the conspiracy.

9. T F

Brutus is the first to stab Caesar.

10. T F

The Second Triumvirate consists of
Antony, Octavius, and Pompey.

11. T F

Antony and Octavius refuse to have
family members murdered.

12. T F

Caesar’s ghost warns Cassius that he will
see him again at Philippi.

13. T F

Pindarus assists Cassius in committing
suicide.

14. T F

Antony refuses to allow a proper burial
for Brutus.

15. T F

At the end of the play, Octavius
emerges as the main leader of the Second Triumvirate.

MULTIPLE CHOICE
1. Marullus and Flavius chastise the crowd for:

a.
b.
c.
d.

drinking in a public place
ignoring Caesar’s procession
disregarding Pompey
working on a holiday

2. Calpurnia is married to

a.
b.
c.
d.

Brutus
Cassius
Antony
Caesar

3. After meeting in the storm, Cassius tells the

other conspirators to meet him at:
a. the Forum
b. the Capitol
c. Pompey’s Porch
d. The Emporium
4. Brutus bases his decision to assassinate Caesar

on
a. his hatred for Caesar
b. what Caesar may do if he is crowned king
c. his own desire to be king
d. the need to please Cassius
5. Portia is nervous in Act II, Scene 3, because:

a. Brutus has told her of the plot to kill
Caesar.
b. The wound in her leg is infected.
c. Lucius has gotten lost.
d. Ligarius has died.
6. Who means to warn Caesar about the con-

spiracy with a letter?
a. the Soothsayer
b. Portia
c. Cicero
d. Artemidorus
7. Brutus offers the crowd one reason for Caesar’s

death:
a. He was too sick to rule.
b. He murdered Pompey.

CliffsComplete Review

c. He was ambitious.
d. He was a poor swimmer.
8. In his funeral speech, Antony consistently

refers to the conspirators as:
a. guilty men
b. honorable men
c. murderers
d. intelligent men
9. After turning the crowd against the conspira-

tors, Antony joins forces with:
a. Casca
b. Cassius
c. Octavius
d. Pompey’s sons
10. In Act IV, the location of the play moves from

Italy to:
a. England
b. Malta
c. Asia Minor
d. Greece
11. Brutus accuses Cassius of:

a.
b.
c.
d.

being a bad leader
killing Portia
accepting bribes
being a coward

12. Brutus follows the philosophy known as:

a.
b.
c.
d.

Idealism
Buddhism
Stoicism
Epicureanism

169

13. Portia dies when:

a.
b.
c.
d.

she is taken prisoner
Octavius hunts her down
she wounds her thigh
she swallows hot coals

14. During the battle at Philippi, Antony and his

men fight against the forces of:
a. Cassius
b. Brutus
c. Lepidus
d. Octavius
15. After discovering Cassius’ body, Brutus decides

to:
a. surrender
b. try to escape
c. commit suicide
d. wage a second battle

FILL IN THE BLANK
1. Shakespeare took much of the story of Julius

Caesar from the works of _______________.
2. Name two of the ailments Caesar is said to suf-

fer from in Act I:_______________ and
_______________.
3. Casca reports to Cicero that he has seen many

strange sights during the evening’s storm.
Three things that he sees include
_______________, _______________ and
_______________.
4. Lucius is Brutus’ _______________.
5. Brutus does not want the conspirators to swear

an _______________.

170

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

6. The job of ensuring that Caesar goes to the

10. Should the play be titled Julius Caesar or Mar-

Capitol is given to _______________.
7. Caesar

call
himself
_______________.”

“constant

cus Brutus? Defend your answer.
as

8. The crowd begs Antony to read Caesar’s

_______________.
9. Antony and Octavius, while discussing Lep-

idus’ worth to the new Triumvirate, compare
him to an _______________.
10. After finding Brutus’ body, Antony calls him

the “_______________ of them all.”

DISCUSSION
Use the following
discussion:

questions

to

generate

1. A major theme of Julius Caesar is that power

can corrupt. Using examples from the play
prove that this is either true or false.

IDENTIFYING PLAY ELEMENTS
Find examples of the following elements in the text
of Julius Caesar:
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Puns
Irony
Foreshadowing
Theme
Imagery
Symbolism
Metaphor
Soliloquy
Personification
Anachronism

ACTIVITIES

2. What are the qualities that constitute a good

The following activities can springboard you into
further discussions and projects:

leader? Based on your list of qualities, who was
the best leader: Caesar, Brutus or Cassius?

1. Write and deliver the speech that Cassius

3. Compare and contrast the two women in the

play, Portia and Calpurnia.
4. Were Brutus and Cassius and the rest of the

conspirators right to kill Caesar? Why?
5. What role does superstition have in the play?
6. Was Brutus an “honorable man?”
7. What might Shakespeare be saying about poets

in Act III, Scene 3, and Act IV, Scene 3?
8. In your opinion, is Caesar’s apparition a ghost

or a figment of Brutus’ guilty conscience?
9. What was Cassius’ fatal flaw?

might have given to the mob after Caesar’s
assassination.
2. Interview someone who lived through the

assassination of a political leader. Report to the
class the effect the murder had on the individual and on the country.
3. Make a character mask: Choose one character

from the play. Next, cut out a mask in the basic
shape of the comedy/tragedy masks. Divide the
mask in two parts with a line vertically down the
center. Using drawings or pictures cut from a
magazine, make a collage on the left side of the
mask that represents the character’s private side.
On the right side of the mask, make a collage
representing the public side of the character.

CliffsComplete Review
4. Write an obituary for any of the characters that

die during the course of the play.
5. Create a mock trial: Pretend that the conspir-

ators where caught and brought to trial. Have
a third of the class work on the defense while
another third works on the prosecution. The
remainder of the class will serve as the defendants and the jury.
6. Hot Seat: Choose five or six main characters
from the play. Divide the class into groups,
with each person in the group assigned one of
the chosen characters. Students then break
from their “home” group and move into a
“character” group. For example, all students
assigned Caesar will move into the Caesar
group. Each student will then write nonstop
for about five minutes an interior dialogue (in
first person only) relating the thoughts and
feelings of the character. Students then share
what they have written within the character
group. Next, the students help each other create a minimum of two questions from the perspective of their characters for the characters
that are not their own. The Caesar group
might come up with a question for Brutus such
as, “Why did you betray me?” Students then
return to their original “home” groups. Within
the “home group,” one student at a time takes
the “hot seat.” The others ask him questions
about his or her behavior in the story and he
or she must respond as honestly as possible.
After five minutes, change the person on the
hot seat.
7. Reading Log: For each scene in each act, keep
a reading log. The log could consist of a summary of the scene, questions you may have
about the scene, new vocabulary words, and
lines from the scene that you found particularly interesting.
8. Performance: Pick a scene or monologue from
the play. Memorize, rehearse, and perform the
scene for your class.

171

9. Design a set and costumes for a performance

of the play.
10. Design and produce a poster that would be
used to advertise a production of Julius Caesar.

ANSWERS
Identify the Quotation
1. Speaker: Cassius; Person spoken to: Brutus;

Location: Act I, Scene 2; Comments: This line
shows Cassius as a man of action, one who is
willing to create his destiny, not rely on the
fates. It also underlines Cassius’ envy that he is
an “underling” to Caesar.
2. Speaker: Caesar; Person spoken to: Antony;

Location: Act I, Scene 2; Comments: As made
evident here, Caesar is himself a great observer
of men. Politicians prefer men who are “fat” or
content, because those who are happy and
comfortable will not rebel.
3. Speaker: Calpurnia; Person spoken to: Caesar;

Location: Act II, Scene 2; Comments: Calpurnia is trying to convince Caesar not to go to
the capitol. There are too many bad signs and
omens and Calpurnia is concerned for her husband’s safety. She refers to the superstition that
the sighting of comets was often connected to
the death of leaders.
4. Speaker: Caesar; Person spoken to: Calpurnia;

Location: Act II, Scene 2; Comments: Caesar
says this in response to Calpurnia’s fears for
Caesar’s life. Knowing that you must die, there
is no need to spend your life fearing it.
5. Speaker: Caesar; Person spoken to: Metul-

lus Cimber; Location: Act III, Scene 1;
Comments: With these lines, Caesar refuses to
listen to Metellus Cimber’s pleas on behalf of
his brother. The lines boldly illustrate Caesar’s
growing arrogance.

172

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

6. Speaker: Antony; Person spoken to: Caesar’s

dead body; Location: Act III, Scene 1; Comments: Mark Antony speaks these words over
the dead body of Julius Caesar. His grief and
anger over the death of his beloved friend move
him to seek a harsh revenge.
7.

Speaker: Antony; Persons spoken to: the
Roman people; Location: Act III, Scene 2;
Comments: In his funeral speech, Antony
moves the crowd to rage and fury by playing
on their greed and sympathy. Here, he shows
the bleeding and butchered body of Caesar to
the crowds, hoping to rouse their anger
towards Brutus.

8. Speaker: Brutus; Person spoken to: Cassius;

Location: Act IV, Scene 3; Comments: Brutus
and Cassius are discussing the next military
moves they are to make against Antony and
Octavius. Cassius has suggested that they stay
put and wait for their enemies to come to
them. Brutus vetoes Cassius’ idea and asserts
that the time to move is now. Again, Brutus
makes the wrong decision while Cassius gives
in to the whims of his friend.
9. Speaker: Brutus; Person spoken to: the spirit of

Caesar; Location: Act V, Scene 3; Comments:
Brutus discovers the body of Cassius. Brutus
realizes that even though Caesar’s body is dead,
his spirit continues to exert an incredible influence over life and events.
10. Speaker: Antony; Location: Act V, Scene 5;

Comments: Antony eulogizes over the body of
Brutus. Are the words spoken sarcastically as
they were in Caesar’s oration? Or does Antony
say what needs to be heard to bring peace and
unity to Rome?

True/False
1. False 2. True 3. True 4. True 5. False 6. True
7. False 8. False 9. False 10. False 11. False
12. False 13. True 14. False 15. True

Multiple Choice
1. c 2. d 3. c 4. b 5. a 6. d 7. c 8. b 9. c 10. c
11. c 12. c 13. d 14. a 15. d

Fill in the Blank
1. Plutarch; 2. Epilepsy, deafness; 3. Lions in
the street, men on fire, ghostly women, owls
during the day; 4. Servant; 5. Oath of allegiance; 6. Decius; 7. The northern star; 8. Will;
9. Ass; 10. Noblest Roman

Julius Caesar

CLIFFSCOMPLETE
RESOURCE CENTER
The learning doesn’t need to stop here. CliffsComplete Resource Center shows you the best of the best:
great links to information in print, on film, and
online. And the following aren’t all the great
resources available to you; visit www.cliffsnotes.com
for tips on reading literature, writing papers, giving
presentations, locating other resources, and testing
your knowledge.

BOOKS AND MAGAZINES
ASIMOV, ISAAC. Asimov’s Guide to Shakespeare.
New York: Wings Books, 1970.
This book provides an excellent background to
the mythological, historical and geographical sources
of Shakespeare’s plays.

KAHN, COPPELIA. Roman Shakespeare: Warriors,
Wounds and Women. London: Routledge Press,
1997.
Kahn provides a feminist interpretation to
Shakespeare’s Roman plays; an interesting look at
gender issues in the plays.
NARDO, DON, ed. Reading on “Julius Caesar.” San
Diego: Greenhaven Press, Inc., 1999.
This anthology of essays is an important
resource of information on Julius Caesar. It includes
information about the plot, Shakespeare’s sources,
character interpretation and themes.
PARSONS, KEITH AND PAMELA MASON, eds.
Shakespeare in Performance. London: Salamander Books, 1995.

CHARNEY, MAURICE. Shakespeare’s Roman Plays:
The Function of Imagery in the Drama. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1961.

A beautifully illustrated book that explores the
performance history of each of Shakespeare’s plays.

Imagery and its role in Shakespeare’s Roman
plays, including Julius Caesar, is explored in depth.

The Shakespeare Magazine. (Georgetown University,
P.O. Box 571006, Washington, D.C.
20057-1006)

COX, JOHN D. AND DAVID SCOTT KASTAN,
eds. A New History of Early English Drama. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1997.

Excellent resource for students and teachers of
Shakespeare.

An intelligent collection of essays on the social
and historical context of early English Drama. The
chapter on the conditions of performance and publication is invaluable in understanding how modern
Shakespeare texts have evolved.

SOHMER, STEVE. Shakespeare’s Mystery Play: The
Opening of the Globe Theatre 1599. Manchester
and New York: Manchester University Press,
1999.

174

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Sohmer seeks to prove that Julius Caesar was the
first play performed at the rebuilt Globe in 1599.
The book also provides very interesting information
on calendar reform and Shakespeare’s possible use
of the Book of Common Prayer.
WELLS, STANLEY. Shakespeare: A Life in Drama.
New York and London: W. W. Norton & Co.,
1995.
This volume is an important companion to
Shakespeare’s work, providing both critical analysis
and performance history.

INTERNET
The Complete Works of William Shakespeare
www.the-tech.mit.edu:80/Shakespeare/works.html

HTML versions of the complete works of
Shakespeare. (Copyright 1995) Provided by The
Tech-MIT. Author: Jeremy Hylton
Mr. William Shakespeare and the Internet
www.daphne.palomar.edu/shakespeare/

with Shakespeare, including the house where he was
born and Mary Arden’s cottage. They also house an
excellent library on Shakespeare and offer courses
throughout the year. Pictures and descriptions of
Shakespeare’s homes are offered on this site along
with course information and study materials on the
plays.
Shakespeare Globe USA
www.shakespeare.uiuc.edu/

A virtual tour of the newly reconstructed Globe
Theatre is a highlight of this site. It also offers some
very interesting information for teachers and students on Shakespeare, his life and plays. There is a
link to John Gielgud reading from Julius Caesar.
Electronic Julius Caesar
www.perseus.tufts/edu/jc

Provided by Tufts University, this web site is an
excellent resource on the play Julius Caesar. In addition to information on Shakespeare’s sources, the site
includes stage history, character analysis and textual
history. Helpful links to other sites.

This is one of the best Shakespeare sites on the
Web, providing information on the plays and poems,
Shakespeare’s life and times, theatre, and criticism.
There are educational materials, links to other related
sites and a guide to searching for Shakespeare on the
Internet. Author: Terry A. Gray

Gaius Julius Caesar

The Shakespeare Classroom

www.novaroma.org/via_romana/virtues/html

www.jetlink.net/~massij/shakes

This site offers teaching materials and study
questions for Shakespeare’s plays. Author: JM Massi,
Ph.D., Psy.D
Shakespeare’s Birthplace Trust
www.shakespeare.org.uk/

Shakespeare’s Birthplace Trust is located in Stratford-upon-Avon and oversees the homes associated

www.geocities.com/athens/acropolis/2100/caesar/index.html

This site contains a detailed history of Julius
Caesar’s life and times.
Roman Virtues
Part of the Nova Roma Home Page, this site
explains the personal and public virtues important
to ancient Romans. Author: Flavius Vedius Germanicus, maintained by Patricia Cassia
Julius Caesar: Historical Background
vroma.rhodes.edu/~bmcamanus/caesar.html

An extensive time line for Julius Caesar with
many excellent illustrations. Author: Barbara
McManus. The College of New Rochelle.

CliffsComplete Resource Center

Julius Caesar Web Guide
www.sdcoe.k12.ca.us/score/caesar/caesarwebguide.html

This site offers an overview of the play with
some wonderful activities for teaching the play.
Author: Joel Sommer Littauer
Globenext
www.50033:shake400@dev99.advanced.org/50033/index.html

Looking at Julius Caesar in performance, this site
offers director’s insights and actor’s interpretations of
the characters along with historian’s perspectives and
a teacher’s guide.

FILMS
Julius Caesar. USA. 122 mins. B & W. 1953.
Directed by: Joseph Mankiewicz. With: Marlon
Brando, James Mason, John Gieldgud, Greer
Garson and Deborah Kerr.

175

Julius Caesar. USA. 116 mins. Color. 1970. Directed
by: Stuart Burge. With: Charleton Heston, Jason
Robards, Richard Chamberlain, Robert Vaughn
and Diana Rigg.
Julius Caesar. BBC. 1979. Directed by: Herbert
Wise. With: Keith Mitchell, Charles Gray and
David Collings.

OTHER MEDIA
Julius Caesar: The Opera. Written by George Frideric
Handel
Julius Caesar, unabridged. Caedmon and Harper
Collins. Shakespeare Society Productions. Read
by: Ralph Richardson and Anthony Quayle and
Introductory essay read by Harold Bloom.

Julius Caesar

CLIFFSCOMPLETE READING
GROUP DISCUSSION GUIDE
Use the following questions and topics to enhance
your reading group discussions. The discussion can
help get you thinking — and hopefully talking —
about Shakespeare in a whole new way!

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Throughout Julius Caesar, you can view many

of the characters’ actions as influenced by
choice (or free will ), influenced by fate (or destiny), or influenced by supernatural forces.
Which of Brutus’ actions seem to come from
free will? Which seem to come from destiny?
What actions seem influenced by supernatural
forces? What about the actions of Caesar? Cassius? Antony? What relationship between free
will, destiny, and supernatural forces does
Shakespeare suggest?
2. Julius Caesar features a large cast of supporting

characters. Why did Shakespeare include the
characters of Casca? Cinna? Lepidus? Calpurnia? Pindarus? Portia? What do these characters add to the play? How would the play be
different if you took away each of these
characters?
3. If you were producing a new stage or film ver-

sion of Julius Caesar, how would you cast the
role of Julius Caesar? Should the actor playing
this role be older (in his 60s or 70s) and weary?
Or middle-aged and still energetic and spry?
How would you costume him? Does his costume make him look out-of-shape or robust?
How does the casting and costuming of Caesar affect the meaning of the entire play?

4. Although many members of Shakespeare’s orig-

inal audience believed in supernatural forces,
far fewer modern audience members do. In
fact, some recent productions of Julius Caesar
have cut all supernatural elements (the soothsayer, the storm before Caesar’s murder, and so
on) from the play in an effort to focus the
drama on the changes within the characters’
minds. Are the supernatural elements in the
play necessary for a modern audience? What
are the benefits of cutting supernatural elements from the play? What does the play lose?
5. It has been said that a good leader inspires fol-

lowers based on a common philosophy or
ideal, while a weak leader inspires followers
based on the leader’s charismatic personality or
personal strengths. Given this definition, how
good of a leader is Caesar? What about Brutus?
Cassius? Antony? Octavius? Which modern
political and business leaders inspire followers
to work for a common philosophy?
6. Female characters — particularly Portia and

Calpurnia — in Julius Caesar seem to have a
secondary importance in the play, even though
many of their opinions are strong and some of
their fears become reality. Where in the play
are women taken seriously? What are the consequences of other characters disregarding their
fear and opinions? What might Shakespeare be
saying about the role of women in Roman society? In politics in general?
7. For business and political leaders, public

demands can often ruin personal relationships.

CliffsComplete Reading Group Discussion Guide

Likewise, a leader’s personal life can affect his
or her ability to publicly lead. What personal
relationships are destroyed in Julius Caesar?
Which public images are destroyed in the play?
What might Shakespeare be saying about the
relationship between our leaders’ public and
private lives? Is a balance between public and
private life ever possible?
8. Although many of the characters and actions

within Julius Caesar are rooted in history, successful productions of the play have been set in
time periods and locations different from those
specified by Shakespeare in his original work.
For example, productions of Julius Caesar have
been set in Nazi Germany, a 1930s Chicago
meatpacking factory, and even in outer space.
What does the play lose when it’s set in a time
period different from its historical roots? What
does the play gain? What characters, lines, or
scenes would need to be cut or rewritten to fit
with changes in time period or location?

177

9. Because the character of Julius Caesar dies so

early in the play, some readers and critics have
suggested that a more appropriate title for
Julius Caesar might be Brutus. In what way is
Brutus’ story the focus of Julius Caesar? Why
might Shakespeare have chosen Julius Caesar
as the title of the play? How does Caesar influence the half of the play in which he does not
appear? Is there a better title for this play?
10. Some productions of Julius Caesar cut some of

Antony’s and Octavius’ lines at the end of the
play. Other productions cut their final entrance
all together and end the play with Brutus’ final
speech and suicide. How important is Antony
and Octavius’ final presence to the end of Julius
Caesar? What are the pros and cons of ending
the play with Brutus’ suicide? Is the play still a
tragedy without Antony and Octavius in the
final scene?

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Index
A
Act of Succession, 10
Act of Supremacy, 10
actors’ gender, 16
ambition. See also power
Antony’s opinion of Caesar’s, 113
Caesar’s desire to be king, 42, 44, 112
Cassius reveals his, 45
Amyot, Jacques, 19
anachronisms
clock as, 70
use of, 29–30
Anti-Stratfordians, 1
Antony, Marc. See Marc Antony
Arden, Mary, 2
aristocracy
of Early Modern England, 12
emerging middle class and, 12–13
Artimedorus, 80, 81, 99
arts, Shakespeare’s influence on, 1
Asimov, Isaac, 173
Asimov’s Guide to Shakespeare (Asimov), 173
assassinations, 101

B
Bedford Companion to Shakespeare, The
(McDonald), 7, 17
beliefs of Early Modern England, 8–9

betrayal
Antony, Octavius, and Lepidus make list of
foes, 123
Brutus and conspirators make list of foes,
69–70
of Caesar and Brutus by friends, 52
of Cassius by Brutus’ forces, 151, 156
Cassius flatters Brutus to join conspiracy, 43
number three associated with, 70
Betterton, Thomas, 20
Bevington, David, 7, 9, 17
Bible, 11
birds at Phillipi, 150
birth
of lions on streets, 77
of Shakespeare, 2
Blackfriars, 5, 15
blank verse
shifting between prose and, 30
as used in Julius Caesar, 18
blood
in Calpurnia’s dream, 77
on hands of conspirators, 101
as humour, 138
as life-nourishing and death-inducing, 30
reinterpreted as sign of Caesar’s sainthood, 78
in staging Caesar’s death, 100–101
body politic
Antony asks who must be purged from, 102
Elizabeth I separates body natural from, 12
illness of Caius Ligarius and, 71

180

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Boleyn, Anne, 10
Book of Common Prayer, 10
books and magazines
on Early Modern England, 17
on Shakespeare’s life and works, 7, 173–174
Booth, Barton, 20
Booth, John Wilkes, 20
Booth, Junius Brutus, 20
Bowers, Fredson, 79
Brutus, Decius. See Decius Brutus
Brutus, Marcus Junius
absolves self from Caesar’s death, 101
army faces Octavius, 151
on Caesar’s death, 112–113
Caesar’s ghost visits, 140, 163
confronted by Portia, 70–71
contrasted with Marc Antony, 123
cries over Cassius’ death, 163
death of, 163
death of Portia, 139
denies feelings in public, 139, 140, 157
desire for power, 68–69
as enemy and son of Caesar, 42
fatal flaws of, 43, 150
historic performances of, 20
illegitimate acts of, 18
inability to judge time, 68, 157
increasing superstition of, 140
joins conspiracy, 43–44, 52
men loyal to, 159
“O Julius Caesar; thou art mighty yet!,” 157,
167, 172
Octavius insults, 149–150
Plutarch’s account of life, 19
poor judgment of, 69–70, 101, 138–139,
140, 150

reasons for fighting at Phillipi, 139–140
relationship to Cassius, 9, 138–139,
150, 163
responds to Octavius’ insults, 150
reticence to kill Antony, 69–70
sensitivity to public opinion, 69–70,
126, 163
similarities with Caesar, 77, 79, 138, 139,
140, 150
swayed by flattery, 43, 79
“There is a tide in the affairs of men,”
167, 172
bubonic plague, 4, 14
“But I am as constant as the Northern Star, “
(Julius Caesar), 100, 167, 171

C
Caesar, Julius. See Julius Caesar
Caesar, Octavius. See Octavius Caesar
Caius Cassius Longinus. See Cassius
Caius Ligarius, 71, 79
calendar reform, 68
Calpurnia
Caesar’s insensitivity to, 42
“When beggars die there are no comets
seen,” 77, 167, 171
Calvin, John, 10
Capitoline, 77
Casca, 52
Cassius
absence at Caesar’s home, 78–79
absolving self from Caesar’s death, 101
allegiance to both Pompey and Caesar, 43
as choleric man, 9, 138

Index

death of, 156
fatal flaws of, 43, 150, 156
fears conspiracy is exposed, 99
flattery used with Brutus, 43
“Men at some time are masters of their
fates,” 167, 171
Octavius Caesar insults Brutus and,
149–150
quarrel with Brutus, 138–139
says goodbye to Brutus, 150
soliloquy revealing his political ambitions, 45
value of friendship for, 138, 150
cast off copy, 16
Catherine of Aragon, 10
Chain of Being, 9
Chaos, 69
Characters of Shakespeares Plays (Hazlitt), 22
Charney, Maurice, 173
Chaucer, Geoffrey, 19
Chettle, Henry, 3
childhood, Shakespeare’s, 2–3
children, Shakespeare’s, 3
Cicero, Marcus Tullius
death of, 139
proposed as co-conspirator, 69
role of, 51
Cinna, Helvius, the poet, 115, 116
Cinna, Lucius Cornelius, 52, 116
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 138
comic relief offered by poet, 139
commoners
Antony’s emotional incitement of, 113,
114, 116
developing divisions between classes, 29, 30

181

love for Caesar, 44
opinion of Brutus, 52
requirements of workers to carry tools of
trade, 29
response to Brutus’ intellectual appeal, 112
using prose to indicate class, 30
viewed by Cassius as trash, 51
Companion to Shakespeare, A (Kastan), 7, 17
Complete Works of Shakespeare, The (Bevington), 7, 9, 17
“Complete Works of William Shakespeare,
The” Web site, 174
compositors, 16
Condell, Henry, 6
conflated versions of plays, 5
conflict, introduction of play’s, 30
conspiracy against Caesar. See also Second
Triumvirate
Artimedorus learns of, 80, 81
blood on hands of conspirators, 101
of Caesar like wrong treatment of disease, 71
Cassius draws Brutus into, 43–44, 52
Cassius organizes men for, 51–52
Cassius’ political ambitions for, 45
inability of conspirators to tell time, 69
constancy, 100
Copernicus, Nicolaus, 8–9
corruption. See also ambition; power
Antony’s manipulation of people, 123
Antony’s undermining of Caesar’s will, 123
assassinations to gain power, 101
by power, 68
dispute of Brutus and Cassius over
bribery, 138
cosmology, 8–9

182

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

costuming
of Julius Caesar, 19
Shakespearean, 16
“Cowards die many times before their deaths”
(Julius Caesar), 167, 171
Cox, John D., 173
Cranmer, Archbishop Thomas, 10
criticism of Julius Caesar, 17, 21–22
“Cry ‘havoc’ and let slip the dogs of war”
(Marc Antony), 167, 172

D
daily life of Early Modern England, 13
Dante, 19
death
of Brutus, 163
of Caesar, 100, 102
of Cassius, 156
of Cinna the poet, 115, 116
of Flavius and Marullus, 45
of Portia, 139
rate of in Early Modern England, 14
Shakespeare’s, 5–6
suicide in Elizabethan England, 99
of Titinius, 157
Decius Brutus
agrees to convince Caesar to go to Capitol, 70
as Caesar’s friend, 52
reinterprets Calpurnia’s dream, 78
Dennis, John, 21–22
Digges, Leonard, 19, 138
disease as imagery, 71

dramatic irony
of Caesar’s “Northern Star” speech, 100
of Cassius’ death, 156
of Cassius repeating soothsayer’s prophesy, 42
dramatic tension
created by Artimedorus’ attempt to alert
Caesar, 81
leading to Caesar’s death, 99
as Portia waits for news, 84
Drayton, Michael, 6
dreams
of Calpurnia, 77
correct interpretation of omens and, 51,
77–78

E
Earl of Southampton (Henry Wriothesley), 4
education, Shakespeare’s, 2–3
Edward VI, 10
Electronic Julius Caesar Web site, 174
elements and humours, 9
Elizabeth I
insistence on Julian calendar, 68
position as woman, 12
primogeniture and, 13
religion in reign of, 10
universal hierarchy and, 9
Elizabethan period, 8
emotions
Brutus’ denial of in public, 139, 140, 157
commoners’ response to Antony’s speeches,
113, 114, 116

Index

humours and, 9
using words to appeal to, 112
England
daily life in, 13
Early Modern, 8
elements and humours, 9
intellectual beliefs and cosmology of, 8–9
issue of calendar reform, 68
language of, 7
limited social mobility in, 12–13
mortality rate in, 14
political context of, 11–12
primogeniture, 13
printing press in, 16–17
publications of Bible in, 11
Reformation and religious persecution, 9–10
renaissance in, 8
theatre in, 14–16
women in, 13
English Renaissance, 8
Epicurean philosophy, 43
epilepsy, Caesar’s, 44
episcopacy, removal of, 11
Erebus, 69
eulogy
Brutus’, 112–113
Marc Antony’s, 113–114
Evans, G. Blakemore, 7

F
fair copy, 17
fatal flaws
of Brutus, 43, 150

183

Caesar’s desire to be king, 42, 44
of Cassius, 43, 150, 156
Fate
Caesar’s tempting of, 77
Cassius accepts his, 150
“Men at some time are masters of their fates”
(Cassius), 167, 171
father, Shakespeare’s, 2
Feast of the Lupercal, 29, 42, 101
februa, 42
fertility rites at Feast of Lupercal, 42
film versions of Julius Caesar, 175
fire imagery
commoners burn conspirators’ homes, 114
as destructive or purifying, 44
in Portia’s suicide, 139
First Folio, 5, 18
flattery
Brutus swayed by, 43, 79
Caesar’s tendency to be swayed by, 79, 99
Flavius, 29, 41, 45
Fletcher, John, 5
Foakes, R. A., 22
foes
Antony, Octavius, and Lepidus list, 123
Brutus and conspirators make list of, 69–70
triumvirate kills 100 senators, 139
folios
defined, 5
printing of, 16
foreshadowing
Brutus’ death, 140
Caesar’s death, 44, 51, 77, 167, 171
Forum, 112

184

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

foul papers, 17
friendship. See also betrayal; love
Antony, Octavius, and Lepidus make list of
foes, 123
betrayal of Caesar and Brutus by friends, 52
of Brutus and Cassius after Caesar’s death,
126, 163
Cassius questions Brutus’, 138
Cassius’ valuing of, 150
loyalty of Brutus’ men, 159
as theme presented by poet, 139

G
Gaius Trebonius, 52
Galileo, 9
Gaius Julius Caesar Web site, 174
ghost of Caesar, 140, 163
Gildon, Charles, 22
Globe Theatre
building of, 4
burning of, 5
performances of Julius Caesar at, 4, 15, 18
reconstruction of, 14, 15
Globenext Web site, 175
Granville-Barker, Harley, 22
Greek influence on Shakespeare, 3
Greenblatt, Stephen, 5, 7, 11, 17
Greene, Robert, 3–4
groundlings, 15

H
Handel, George Frideric, 175
Hathaway, Anne, 3
Hazlitt, William, 22

head and heart, balancing, 43
heavens, 15
Helvius Cinna (poet), 115, 116
Heminge, John, 6
Henry VIII, 10
Higgins, John, 19
hornbook, 2
humours
Cassius as choleric man, 9, 138
defined, 9

I
iambic pentameter, 7, 18
identity of Shakespeare, 1
Ides of March
soothsayer’s prediction about, 42
storm preceding, 51
illness as imagery, 71
imagery
blood as, 30, 77, 78, 100–101
of disease and illness, 71
of fire, 44, 114
of mirror to reflect moral nature, 43
of setting sun, 156
of storm, 51
intellectual appeal to commoners’, 112
Internet resources for Julius Caesar, 174–175
irony. See dramatic irony

J
Jacobean period, 8
James I, 12
Johnson, Samuel, 22, 138
Jonson, Ben, 3, 6

Index

Julian calendar, 68
“Julius Caesar: Historical Background” Web
site, 174
Julius Caesar: The Opera (Handel), 175
Julius Caesar
criticism of, 17, 21–22
date and text of, 18–19
film versions of, 175
history of performances, 19–21
humours referenced in, 9
map of characters in, 23
opinions about, 17
performances of in Globe, 4, 15, 18
sources for, 19
stage directions in play, 99
structure of, 17–18
Julius Caesar (character)
ambition to be king, 42, 44, 112
Antony’s opinion of his ambition, 113
Antony’s undercutting of will, 123
avenging of death, 163
birth of, 30
Brutus as illegitimate son of, 42
“But I am as constant as the Northern Star,”
100, 167, 171
character of, 42
“Cowards die many times before their
deaths,” 167, 171
death of, 100, 102
foreshadowing of death, 44, 51, 77
ghost visits Brutus, 140, 163
health of, 44
human frailty of, 41
illegitimate acts of, 18
increasing superstition of, 77–78
influence of power on, 41, 42, 71, 100

185

“Let me have men about me that are fat,”
167, 171
Plutarch’s account of life, 19
portrayed by Cassius as ambitious and weak
tyrant, 51
pride of, 78, 100
reading of will, 114
refusal of crown, 44
Shakespeare’s interest in, 18
similarities with Brutus, 77, 79, 138, 139,
140, 150
swayed by flattery, 79, 99
as true friend of Brutus, 163
viewed self as deity, 41, 100
Julius Caesar Web Guide Web site, 175

K
Kahn, Coppelia, 22, 173
Kastan, David Scott, 7, 17, 22, 173
Kemble, John Phillip, 20
King’s Men, 5
King’s New School, 2
Knight, G. Wilson, 22
Kynaston, Edward, 20

L
language
indicating class with blank verse and
prose, 30
personification, 84
puns, 7, 30
Shakespeare’s use of anachronisms,
29–30, 70
understanding Shakespeare’s, 7

186

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

Last Supper, 79
leadership
Brutus as man who denies feelings, 139,
140, 157
Brutus’ sensitivity to public opinion, 69–70,
126, 163
Caesar’s physical weaknesses, 44
constancy as quality in, 100
creation of new triumvirate, 123
disparity between public image and private
person, 41, 140, 157
eroding relationship between Cassius and
Brutus, 126
naivete and poor judgment of Brutus, 69,
101, 138–139, 140, 150
poor judgment of Cassius, 150, 156
Lepidus, Marcus Aemilius, 123
“Let me have men about me that are fat”
(Julius Caesar), 167, 171
life
in Early Modern England, 13
in London, 14
Ligarius, 71, 79
Lincoln, President Abraham, 20
lions giving birth on streets, 77
literary influences on Shakespeare, Greek and
Roman, 3
Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans
(Plutarch), 19
London
life in, 14
map of, 4
Lord Chamberlain’s Men, 4, 5, 15
love
commoners had for Caesar, 44
of men for Brutus, 159

as theme, 126
as theme presented by poet, 139
Lucilius, 159
Lucius Cornelius Cinna, 52, 116
Lupercalian holiday, 29, 101
Luther, Martin, 10

M
MacCallum, M. W., 22
Machiavellian tendencies of Cassius, 45
Macready, W. C., 21
map
of characters, 23
of London, 4
Marc Antony
allegiance to Caesar, 41–42
Brutus assesses weaknesses of, 69
“Cry ‘havoc’ and let slip the dogs of war,”
167, 172
eulogy for Brutus, 163–164
invokes Caesar’s spirit, 102
manipulative character of, 102, 114, 123,
163–164
mask of, 123
Octavius Caesar disagrees with, 149
opinion of Caesar’s ambition, 113
Plutarch’s account of life, 19
as priest in Lupercal festivities, 42
reads Caesar’s will, 114
spares Lucilius’ life, 159
“This was the most unkindest cut of all,”
114, 167, 172
“This was the noblest Roman of them all,”
163, 167, 172
tries to cheat people from Caesar’s will, 123

Index

Marcus Cato, 159
Marcus Junius Brutus. See Brutus, Marcus
Junius
Marcus Phaonius, 139
Marcus Tullius Cicero. See Cicero, Marcus
Tullius
marriage
primogeniture and, 13
sixteenth-century concept of, 3
Marullus
arrest of, 41
death of, 45
interrupting crowd in Act I, 29, 30
Mary, 10
Mason, Pamela, 173
Master of the Revels, 14
McDonald, Russ, 7, 17
“Men at some time are masters of their fates”
(Cassius), 167, 171
Messala, 139, 150
metadrama, 101
metatheatre, 101
Metellus Cimber, 99
middle class, 12–13
Milward, William, 20
Mirror for Magistrates, A (Higgins), 19
mirror imagery, 43
mob. See commoners
movies
influenced by Shakespeare’s plays, 1
Shakespeare in Love, 1, 15
“Mr. William Shakespeare and the Internet”
Web site, 174

187

N
name
confusion between Cinna the poet and the
conspirator, 116
power of Caesar’s name in death, 44
Nardo, Don, 173
Nashe, Thomas, 3
New History of Early English Drama, A (Cox
and Kastan), 173
New Place, 4
North, Sir Thomas, 19
“Northern Star” speech, 100, 167, 171
Norton Shakespeare, The (Greenblatt), 5, 7,
11, 17

O
“O Julius Caesar; thou art mighty yet!” (Brutus), 157, 167, 172
Octavius Caesar
calls end to war, 164
disagrees with Antony, 149
illegitimate acts of, 18
insults Cassius and Brutus, 149–150
makes list of foes, 123
overpowered by Brutus’ forces, 151
omens
of birds at Phillipi, 150
Caesar’s fear of Calpurnia’s dream, 77
interpretation of, 51, 77–78
soothsayer’s warning as, 42
omens. See also superstition

188

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

P
parallelism, 112
parents of Shakespeare, 2
Parsons, Keith, 173
passive obedience, 11
pentameter, 7, 18
personification, 84
petty school, 2
Phillipi, 139–140
philosophy
Epicurean, 43
Stoicism, 42–43
Pindarus, 156
pit, 15
Platter, Thomas, 18, 19
plays of Shakespeare, 3–5
chronology of, 6
publication of, 4–5, 16–17
stage success of, 4
Plutarch, 100, 194
poet
as comic relief, 139
death of Cinna the, 116
poetry
iambic pentameter, 7, 18
publication of Shakespeare’s early, 4
politics
Acts of Succession and of Supremacy, 10
Elizabeth I and, 11–12
Henry VIII’s divorce from Catherine of
Aragon, 10
role of James I, 12
Pompey, 30
Pompey’s Porch, 52

Pope, Alexander, 126
Portia
death of, 139
gashes self with razor, 70–71
strength of character, 70, 84
waits to hear news from capitol, 84
power. See also ambition; corruption
assassinations to gain, 101
Brutus’ concern with public image, 69–70,
126, 163
Brutus’ desire for, 68–69
Caesar’s desire for, 71
dispute of Brutus and Cassius over bribery,
138
effect of on relationship between Brutus and
Cassius, 126
leading to Caesar’s arrogance, 41, 42, 100
premarital contracts, 3
pride
Brutus’, 69–70, 126, 163
Caesar’s, 41, 100
Decius appeals to Caesar’s, 78
primogeniture, 13
primum mobile (Prime Mover), 8
printing press, 16–17
prompt book, 17, 19
pronouns in Shakespearean plays, 7
Protestant Reformation, 10
Ptolemy, 8
publications of Shakespeare’s plays, 4–5
by Heminge and Condell, 6
First Folio, 5, 18
of Julius Caesar, 18–19
printing press and, 16–17
in quartos, 4–5

Index

puns
defined, 7
used by Cobbler, 30
Puritans
opposition to theatres, 14
persecution of, 11

Q

189

R
Reading on “Julius Caesar” (Nardo), 173
Reformation, 9–10
religion
Chain of Being, 9
death viewed as god’s punishment, 14
divine right of kings, 11
Henry VIII’s Act of Succession, 10
publication of Great Bible, 11
Reformation and religious persecution, 9–10
of Shakespeare family, 2
renaissance, 8
retelling of history, 164
revenge plays, 17–18
Riverside Shakespeare, The (Evans), 7
Roman influence on Shakespeare, 3
Roman Shakespeare (Coppelia), 22, 173
Roman Virtues Web site, 174
Romulus and Remus, 29, 30
Rymer, Thomas, 21–22

quarrel between Brutus and Cassius, 138–139
quartos, 4–5
Quin, James, 20
quotations
“But I am as constant as the Northern Star, “
(Julius Caesar), 100, 167, 171
“Cowards die many times before their
deaths” (Julius Caesar), 167, 171
“Cry ‘havoc’ and let slip the dogs of war”
(Marc Antony), 167, 172
“Let me have men about me that are fat”
(Julius Caesar), 167, 171
“Men at some time are masters of their fates”
(Cassius), 167, 171
S
“O Julius Caesar; thou art mighty yet!” (Brutus), 157, 167, 172
sacrifice, morning’s, 77
“There is a tide in the affairs of men” (Bruscience
tus), 167, 172
Chain of Being, 9
“This was the most unkindest cut of all”
cosmology, 8–9
(Marc Antony), 114, 167, 172
elements and humours, 9
“This was the noblest Roman of them all”
Second Triumvirate
(Marc Antony), 163, 167, 172
creation of, 123
“When beggars die there are no comets seen”
kills 100 senators, 139
(Calpurnia), 77, 167, 171
parallelism between list making scenes of
conspirators and, 123

190

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

self-deification, of Caesar, 41, 100
Servilia, 42
Seymour, Jane, 10
Shakespeare: A Life in Drama (Wells), 174
Shakespeare, Hamnet, 3
Shakespeare, John, 2
Shakespeare, Judith, 3, 5–6
Shakespeare, Mary Arden, 2
Shakespeare, Susanna, 3
Shakespeare, William, 1–7
birth and parents of, 2
childhood and education of, 2–3
chronology of plays, 6
contemporary reviews of, 3–4
controversy about identity, 1
Early Modern period of England and, 8
influences on modern stage and screen, 1
interest in Julius Caesar, 18
language of, 7
last years of life, 5–6
map of characters in Julius Caesar, 23
plays of, 3–5
sources for Julius Caesar, 19
wife and children of, 3
Shakespeare After Theory (Kastan), 22
“Shakespeare Classroom, The” Web site, 174
Shakespeare Globe USA Web site, 174
Shakespeare in Love, 1, 15
Shakespeare in Performance (Parsons and
Mason), 173
Shakespeare Magazine, The, 173
Shakespeare’s Birthplace Trust Web site, 174
Shakespeare’s Mystery Play (Sohmer), 173–174
Shakespeare’s Roman Plays (Charney), 173
Shaw, Glenn Byam, 21

sheets, 16
social class. See also commoners
aristocracy and emerging middle class,
12–13
attitudes about theatre and, 14
divisions between, 29, 30
primogeniture and status of women, 13
using blank verse and prose to indicate, 30
workers required to carry tools of trade, 29
Sohmer, Steve, 173–174
soliloquy
Cassius’, 45
defined, 45
Soothsayer
in conversation with Portia, 84
prophecy of, 42
second warning of, 99
sound effects of Elizabethan theatre, 51
Spencer, T.J.B., 17
staging
of Caesar’s death, 100–101
division of Scenes 2 and 3 in Act IV, 126
of Early Modern productions, 16
included in play dialog, 99
sound effects of Elizabethan theatre, 51
Stampfer, Judah, 18
Stoicism, 42–43
stop-press corrections, 16
storm imagery, 51
Stratford-upon-Avon, 2
structure
comic relief of poet, 139
division between Scenes 2 and 3 in
Act IV, 126
introducing dramatic conflict, 30

Index

of Julius Caesar, 17–18
Octavius restores order in last scene, 164
parallelism in list making of foes, 123
Portia’s death revealed twice, 139
suicide
of Cassius, 156
Cassius and Brutus discuss, 150
in Elizabethan England, 99
Portia’s, 139
sun, imagery of, 156
superstition
about comets and death of monarch, 77
Brutus’ increasing, 140, 163
Caesar’s increasing, 77–78
lack of heart in morning’s sacrifice, 77
of Lupercal and soothsaying, 42

T
Taylor, Gary, 6, 7
tension. See dramatic tension
Theatre, The, 4
theatres. See also staging
bubonic plague closes, 4, 14
burning of Globe, 5
design of, 15
opening of Globe, 4
social attitudes toward, 14
themes
correct interpretation of dreams and omens,
51, 77–78
of disease, 71
inability to judge time or situations, 68,
69, 157
love and friendship as, 126, 139

191

“There is a tide in the affairs of men” (Brutus),
167, 172
“This was the most unkindest cut of all” (Marc
Antony), 114, 167, 172
“This was the noblest Roman of them all”
(Marc Antony), 163, 167, 172
time
anachronism of clock, 70
Brutus’ inability to judge, 68, 157
inability of conspirators to tell, 69
Titinius, 156, 157
Tragic Engagement, The (Stampfer), 18
Tree, Herbert Beerbohm, 21
triumvirate. See Second Triumvirate
Tyndale, William, 11

U
Ulrici, Herman, 22

V
vision, Cassius’, 156

W
Web sites on Shakespeare and Julius Caesar,
174–175
Wells, Stanley, 6, 7, 174
“When beggars die there are no comets seen”
(Calpurnia), 77, 167, 171
wife of Shakespeare, 3
Wilks, Robert, 20

192

CliffsComplete Julius Caesar

will of Caesar, 114, 123
William Shakespeare: A Textual Companion
(Wells and Taylor), 6, 7
Wilson, Dover, 22
women
Elizabeth I position as, 9, 12, 13
fertility rites at Feast of Lupercal, 42
legal status of, 13
Portia as virtuous and strong, 70–71, 84
wordplay
between Carpenter and Cobbler, 30
of Shakespeare, 7
words
Antony’s manipulation of people with, 102,
163–164
appealing to intellect and emotion with, 112
before blows, 149
Wriothesley, Henry, 4

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

Notes
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________

CLIFFSCOMPLETE
Hamlet
Julius Caesar
King Henry IV, Part I
King Lear
Macbeth
The Merchant of Venice
Othello
Romeo and Juliet
The Tempest
Twelfth Night

Look for Other
Series in the
CliffsNotes Family
LITERATURE NOTES
Absalom, Absalom!
The Aeneid
Agamemnon
Alice in Wonderland
All the King’s Men
All the Pretty Horses
All Quiet on Western Front
All’s Well & Merry Wives
American Poets of the
20th Century
American Tragedy
Animal Farm
Anna Karenina
Anthem
Antony and Cleopatra
Aristotle’s Ethics
As I Lay Dying
The Assistant
As You Like It
Atlas Shrugged
Autobiography of Ben Franklin
Autobiography of Malcolm X
The Awakening
Babbit
Bartleby & Benito Cereno
The Bean Trees
The Bear
The Bell Jar
Beloved
Beowulf
Billy Budd & Typee
Black Boy
Black Like Me

Bleak House
Bless Me, Ultima
The Bluest Eye & Sula
Brave New World
Brothers Karamazov
Call of Wild & White Fang
Candide
The Canterbury Tales
Catch-22
Catcher in the Rye
The Chosen
Cliffs Notes on the Bible
The Color Purple
Comedy of Errors…
Connecticut Yankee
The Contender
The Count of Monte Cristo
Crime and Punishment
The Crucible
Cry, the Beloved Country
Cyrano de Bergerac
Daisy Miller & Turn…Screw
David Copperfield
Death of a Salesman
The Deerslayer
Diary of Anne Frank
Divine Comedy-I. Inferno
Divine Comedy-II. Purgatorio
Divine Comedy-III. Paradiso
Doctor Faustus
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde
Don Juan
Don Quixote
Dracula
Emerson’s Essays
Emily Dickinson Poems
Emma
Ethan Frome
Euripides’ Electra & Medea
The Faerie Queene
Fahrenheit 451
Far from Madding Crowd
A Farewell to Arms
Farewell to Manzanar
Fathers and Sons
Faulkner’s Short Stories
Faust Pt. I & Pt. II
The Federalist
Flowers for Algernon
For Whom the Bell Tolls
The Fountainhead
Frankenstein
The French Lieutenant’s Woman
The Giver
Glass Menagerie & Streetcar
Go Down, Moses

The Good Earth
Grapes of Wrath
Great Expectations
The Great Gatsby
Greek Classics
Gulliver’s Travels
Hamlet
The Handmaid’s Tale
Hard Times
Heart of Darkness & Secret Sharer
Hemingway’s Short Stories
Henry IV Part 1
Henry IV Part 2
Henry V
House Made of Dawn
The House of the Seven Gables
Huckleberry Finn
I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings
Ibsen’s Plays I
Ibsen’s Plays II
The Idiot
Idylls of the King
The Iliad
Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl
Inherit the Wind
Invisible Man
Ivanhoe
Jane Eyre
Joseph Andrews
The Joy Luck Club
Jude the Obscure
Julius Caesar
The Jungle
Kafka’s Short Stories
Keats & Shelley
The Killer Angels
King Lear
The Kitchen God’s Wife
The Last of the Mohicans
Le Morte Darthur
Leaves of Grass
Les Miserables
A Lesson Before Dying
Light in August
The Light in the Forest
Lord Jim
Lord of the Flies
Lord of the Rings
Lost Horizon
Lysistrata & Other Comedies
Macbeth
Madame Bovary
Main Street
The Mayor of Casterbridge
Measure for Measure
The Merchant of Venice

Middlemarch
A Midsummer-Night’s Dream
The Mill on the Floss
Moby-Dick
Moll Flanders
Mrs. Dalloway
Much Ado About Nothing
My Ántonia
Mythology
Narr. …Frederick Douglass
Native Son
New Testament
Night
1984
Notes from Underground
The Odyssey
Oedipus Trilogy
Of Human Bondage
Of Mice and Men
The Old Man and the Sea
Old Testament
Oliver Twist
The Once and Future King
One Day in the Life of
Ivan Denisovich
One Flew Over Cuckoo’s Nest
100 Years of Solitude
O’Neill’s Plays
Othello
Our Town
The Outsiders
The Ox-Bow Incident
Paradise Lost
A Passage to India
The Pearl
The Pickwick Papers
The Picture of Dorian Gray
Pilgrim’s Progress
The Plague
Plato’s Euthyphro…
Plato’s The Republic
Poe’s Short Stories
A Portrait of the Artist …
The Portrait of a Lady
The Power and the Glory
Pride and Prejudice
The Prince
The Prince and the Pauper
A Raisin in the Sun
The Red Badge of Courage
The Red Pony
The Return of the Native
Richard II
Richard III
The Rise of Silas Lapham
Robinson Crusoe

